 The Godfather
      and
American Culture
SUNY series in Italian/American Culture
      Fred L. Gardaphe, editor
 The Godfather
      and
American Culture

            How the Corleones
            Became “Our Gang”




       Chris Messenger




  State University of New York Press
Published by
State University of New York Press, Albany

© 2002 State University of New York

All rights reserved

Printed in the United States of America

No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission. No part of this book may be
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means
including electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise without the prior permission in writing of the publisher.

For information, address the State University of New York Press,
90 State Street, Suite 700, Albany, NY 12207

Production by Marilyn P. Semerad
Marketing by Patrick Durocher

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Messenger, Christian K., 1943–
   The Godfather and American culture : how the Corleones became
 “Our Gang” / Chris Messenger.
      p. cm. — (SUNY series in Italian/American culture)
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
   ISBN 0-7914-5357-X (alk. paper) — ISBN 0-7914-5358-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
   1. Puzo, Mario, 1920– Godfather. 2. Corleone family (Fictitious
 characters) 3. Italian Americans in literature. 4. Criminals in literature.
 5. Family in literature. 6. Mafia in literature. I. Title. II. Series.

  PS3566.U9 G63 2002
  813'.54—dc21                                                      2001049424


                        10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
                           Contents

Acknowledgments                                                   vii
Introduction                                                        1

PART I         Popular Fiction Criticism and American Careers
Chapter 1      Popular Fiction: Taste, Sentiment, and the
                 Culture of Criticism                             19
Chapter 2      Mario Puzo: An American Writer’s Career            51

PART II        Reading The Godfather: Critical Strategies and
                 Theoretical Models
Chapter 3      Bakhtin and Puzo: Authority as the Family
                 Business                                          87
Chapter 4      The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble              107
Chapter 5      Barthes and Puzo: The Authority of the Signifier   149

PART III       Positioning The Godfather in American
                 Narrative Study
Chapter 6      The Godfather and Melodrama: Authorizing the
                 Corleones as American Heroes                     173
Chapter 7      The Corleones as “Our Gang”: The Godfather
                 Interrogated by Doctorow’s Ragtime               209
Chapter 8      The American Inadvertent Epic: The Godfather
                 Copied                                           229
Chapter 9      The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                 253

Conclusion                                                        291
Notes                                                             299
Works Cited                                                       317
Index                                                             327



                                     v
This page intentionally left blank.
                Acknowledgments

      The Godfather has been with us in America for a long time, and my
interest has been germinating for what seems like decades as well. Puzo’s
and Coppola’s texts have been important to my teaching about popular
narrative at the University of Illinois at Chicago for fifteen years. I’ve
taught The Godfather in many contexts in literature courses to everyone
from initially dubious freshmen who thought the university was for other
pursuits to Ph.D. candidates who became willing accomplices in critical
heists of theories and reading agendas. Thanks also goes to several criti-
cal reading friends: Marsha Cassidy, Gloria Nardini, Dina Bozicas, Ma-
rina Lewis, and Gina Frangello. Special thanks to John Huntington whose
standards dictate that his good estimate of my prose is a sign that I might
have nailed it. I benefited from the State University of New York Press
readings of Frank Lentricchia and Anthony J. Tamburri. I’ve come full
circle with Fred Gardaphe through our mutual interests and manuscripts;
having been called upon to perform a major service for each other, we’ve
formed a critical family of two.
      My first pass at the Roland Barthes material in chapter 5 was facili-
tated by a Humanities Institute Fellowship at UIC. At State University of
New York Press, I would like to thank my acquisitions editor, James
Peltz, production editor Marilyn Semerad, marketing manager Patrick
Durocher, and freelance copyeditor Camille Hale. I am grateful to Donadio
& Olson, Inc. for permission to quote from the works of Mario Puzo.
      I’ve been surrounded at home by Godfather aficionados. A part of
the Messenger family business has always been good reading, writing,
and editing, and I hope I’ve been more benign paterfamilias than Corleone.
Thanks, Carrie, Luke, and Ellie. Finally, no book would ever get done
without Janet, editor and compass down all the years, who, when I made
the offer, did not refuse, and thereby hangs the tale of our life.




                                    vii
This page intentionally left blank.
                        Introduction


       The Critic’s Voice in Popular Fiction Study

       Several years ago I became captivated by two scenes in The Godfa-
ther, which both fascinated and repelled me. The first is the deathbed
scene between Vito Corleone and his dying consigliere Genco Abbandando
on Connie Corleone’s wedding day; the narrative voice concludes, “as if
the Don could truly snatch the life of Genco Abbandando back from that
most foul and criminal traitor to man” (48). The second scene shows
Hollywood producer Jack Woltz in shock to find the severed head of his
stallion, Khartoum, bleeding at the foot of his bed; after he stops scream-
ing, he thinks that “there couldn’t be any kind of world if people acted
this way” (69). Everything about the two scenes is visceral and immedi-
ate, yet their respective conclusions seemed to me oddly ameliorating
under strange circumstances of narrative agency. In the Genco scene,
Mario Puzo ended with the blandest of universals about the power of
death. The Woltz scene ended in either a great hypocrisy or a weak irony
or both. I was unable to account for the scenes’ undeniable power, which
culminated in capitulation to slack moralizing about “death” or “capital-
ism.” How about a popular writer who could get me going that way! I
found myself writing “Puzo” or “Michael” or “Don C” in the margins of
critical pieces I read. Everything I was absorbing about history, ideology,
aesthetics, the family, dialogue, monologue, best sellers, elite fiction moved
me to wander back to The Godfather as site.
       Some day—and I knew that day might never come—I would be
called upon to perform a service, to explain to myself and to a readership
the full range of this American popular classic and the contradictions in
the long career of its author. The challenge to get The Godfather and Puzo
done right became the offer I couldn’t refuse. Just like Don Corleone’s
family and its power, The Godfather appeared to take root in my critical
consciousness. If I had indeed been colonized, like any aware colonial
subject, I wanted to convert the language of domination into my own
rhetorical capital. In short, I wanted to explain how the Corleones had
become “Our Gang” in America, in as complete a takeover as any popu-
lar narrative had achieved in the late twentieth century.
       Certain subjects kept posing themselves as questions to me: how
were readers to grieve for the novel’s real victims of the Corleones who

                                      1
2                   The Godfather and American Culture



are never mentioned in the novel? I numbered these to be the drug
addicts and runners; the victims of bookmakers, prostitution, and loan
sharking; those who provided kickbacks for protection; and the honest
members of labor unions. How could readers break into Puzo’s monologic
approval of his “good” murderers when he gives us little choice but to
root for them to kill his “bad” murderers? How could I talk of these
subjects without losing my objectivity, my critical “distance”? For I didn’t
feel distanced. At times, I was mad as hell at Puzo’s text and wanted
him/it to suffer critically for every morally equivocating, prurient, sen-
sationalized piece of literature or film that I’d had put up with, ranging
back to early childhood. At other moments, I thrilled to the Corleone
victories over their enemies. After all, as a reader I had gone to their
children’s weddings, watched them cook pasta, and suffered the repeated
injustices inflicted on them. When Michael Corleone orchestrated the
deaths of the heads of the Five Families, I had to admit they got exactly
what they deserved.
       In this book I want to reproduce in criticism precisely this swing
between the critical reader who disapproves of Puzo’s rhetorical ma-
neuvering and the reader in myself who as a child eagerly joined the
Saturday matinee crowd cheering as the villains on screen finally bought
it in their climactic battle with the white hats. But in this case the white
hats had become the Corleones. Both readers, the moral scold and the
cheerleader for the plot victories, lived inside my literary-critical self,
which purported to or who was told to know better. “Know better”
contains in its elite caution everything the trained literary critic knows
about advocacy, ethical argument, and evaluation, which the critic is
taught belongs to the discourses of law, philosophy, and religion. Such
concepts lie behind any possible renderings we can make as critics, but
since the New Criticism, they remain in prewriting, to be mined or
ground into rational and finally theoretical arguments far from the level
of the text or its engendered responses. The injustices done to and by
the Corleones were finally matched by my readerly sense of injustice,
what I might call “crimes against the narrative” committed by the author
for my pleasure and instruction.
       Pierre Bourdieu in his postscript to Distinction (1979, trans. 1984)
summarizes Kant’s principle of pure taste as “nothing other than a refusal,
a disgust—a disgust for objects which impose enjoyment.” Bourdieu adds
that “disgust is the paradoxical experience of enjoyment extorted by vio-
lence, an enjoyment which arouses horror. This horror, unknown to those
who surrender to sensation [emphasis mine] results fundamentally from the
removal of distance, in which freedom is asserted, between the represen-
tation and the thing represented” (488), causing an alienation from the
artifact but providing its own peculiar definition of enjoyment, which only
the trained critic can truly savor. However, what happens when the critic
wants to retain a relation with the large readership of a best seller such as
                                 Introduction                                3



The Godfather, who wants to retain both a membership in those “attracted”
and those “repelled” and needs to sustain this split personality while dis-
cussing a work, any work?
       I was not above surrendering to sensation but, like most readers
and viewers, I wanted to pick my spots, script my own pleasures insofar
as possible, and take offense when I wanted to. I supposedly knew how
to be disinterested in the highest Kantian sense, to make disgust my
hidden friend, to eschew sensation and sentiment when necessary, to
refuse the “easy” insight and conclusion. Yet I didn’t want to become
some version of the critical police and live constantly with the fear that
somewhere some reader or viewer is enjoying The Godfather. Well, I
thought, Don Corleone knows how to practice this elite distancing. He
knows how to serve up revenge, a dish best served cold, he tells us (404).
Was there a riddle here? Could the vaunted modernist distancing, the
view from “the tower,” the historically conditioned great-grandchild of
“emotion recollected in tranquility” be akin to the great calm from which
the Don acted in the affairs of men? I presumed I had become somewhat
desperate in crafting my critical strategies by analogy to the career of the
protagonist whom I wished to explain by the criticism itself. Yet how
could I keep my distance from The Godfather and mime the way in which
Don Corleone keeps his distance from his victims?
       I could attempt to kill Puzo with traditional elite critical strategies.
However, that was not a very surgical gangland hit. What would I gain
by demonstrating that he wasn’t Balzac or Hemingway or Mailer (al-
though he was trying to be all three at different times)? No one was
likely to give me an argument there. Then, in an alternate move more in
the contemporary critical climate, I could excoriate Puzo as caught in
classic false consciousness, a writer purporting to create an ethnic hero,
a modern Robin Hood, but a hero who was really the worst that the
capitalist system could muster, a murderer who accumulated an excess
capital, a fund of trust and obligation that masqueraded as Old World
fealty but also had everything to do with corruption of institutions in an
open society. Such an analysis seemed overly shrill and not revelatory of
The Godfather’s power and popular acceptance.
       I needed a key to what had always troubled me about popular
fiction: its way of speaking about everything that is important in ways
that prematurely recontain the subjects in some way or another. Popular
literature’s “escape” wasn’t simple as a category. This escape came in a
complex series of evasions and deflections about “Freedom,” “America,”
and “Destiny” that often appeared to affirm on the level of a novel’s
symbolization precisely what I had wished to deny at the level of cri-
tique. I had the perennial precritical misgiving about popular literature
criticism: how to transfer what I considered an ethical position or an
aesthetic quarrel into a critical lingua franca that neither overtly privi-
leged my sympathetic outrage from a secure bourgeois and academic
4                    The Godfather and American Culture



position nor underscored my negative appraisal of what I considered to
be an “inferior” literary product.
       So, how to talk about a book and an author that I couldn’t find the
rhetoric to talk about? I could tell why I as a trained critic could not abide
some of Puzo’s novelistic choices. His text often seemed out of his con-
trol, both internally chaotic and contradictory. Yet thirty million copies of
The Godfather were sold in the 1970s, making it by far the best-selling
American novel of the decade. The Godfather films were stunningly pow-
erful for audiences all over the world. People loved these movies and
repeated their lines, until they entered the language (“I’ll make him an
offer he can’t refuse”; “he sleeps with the fishes”; “leave the gun—take
the cannoli”; “go to the mattresses”). The Corleones, the violent, im-
moral, misogynist Corleones, were a proto-family for our time, the tightly-
knit unit, the family that murdered together stayed together. The Godfather
posited a truly complete American fantasy, that of New World mobility
and power within an Old World identity. The family ventured out into
a larger America that it controlled in the hidden name of family. Even the
morality play of Michael’s dissolution as a melancholy, patriarchal mur-
derer by the end of the second Godfather film did nothing to cut the
fascination with the Corleone hegemony. Here was an American melo-
drama that took root in the national imagination as it did on the charts.
The Corleone family takeover was both psychic and economic in the
American culture. They had in fundamental ways become us. They were
“Our Gang.”
       Then again, who comprises Puzo’s readership? Surely it cuts and
cross-cuts among critically trained readers and consumers who only read
best sellers. Many of us consume fiction as a commodity across a wide
spectrum of simplicity and difficulty and are capable of appreciating and
discriminating between artifacts and their affects without having a crisis
of readerly or professional conscience every time we convert our re-
sponse from, say, Faulkner’s Absalom, Absalom! to Mitchell’s Gone with the
Wind, two novels of 1936 which should have a miscegenated congress
between them. Puzo himself has shown how rigidly he segregated his
views of art from the marketplace. Before writing The Godfather, Puzo
experienced twenty years as a “failed” or “undiscovered” novelist and
later wrote that he felt he had been “a true believer in art”: “I didn’t
believe in religion or love or women or men. I didn’t believe in society
or philosophy. But I believed in art for forty-five years. It gave me a
comfort I found in no other place” (“The Making of The Godfather” 34).
He also admitted he’d written “below his gifts in The Godfather” and then
made a fortune. Yet his almost totally reified view of art as a godlike
force and his immediate negation of all subjects that such art might portray
perfectly mirrored the frustrations a reader might have in following out
such concepts in his fiction. Puzo’s rhetoric includes large abstractions
that contain even greater suggestiveness, but then he prematurely hurls
                                 Introduction                                 5



thunderbolts such as “love” and “philosophy” only to crash them back
into place as they relate to his own personal melancholy and “comfort.”
Such a grandiose obsessiveness with the inflated led him finally, unerr-
ingly, to popular success.
       Viewed another way, Puzo’s belief in art and subsequent crisis of
belief is revealing on several levels. First, he reproduces the popular
readership’s reverence for elite fiction it doesn’t truly understand or even
like but to which it is told to aspire. Second, his belief in art can mirror
the critic’s belief in criticism, a belief “shaken” when confronting pre-
cisely the fiction that Puzo finally produces. The critic has been trained
to transact ambiguous, complex, ironic business through in-depth study
and ever more philosophical and intellectual tools, rather than assess
across a more horizontal field of surfaces the intent and impact that a
work such as The Godfather has on American culture that converts its
literary capital through film and television into language, style, and ide-
ology. As The Godfather becomes pervasive on many fronts, it threatens
not only to dwarf Puzo himself, who tends to fall away in studies of the
films, for example, but it frustrates any critic who would see the works
whole, the traditional humanist legacy for contemporary criticism from
a critical godfather such as Lionel Trilling.
       Thus I write here about an author, a novel, three films, a cultural text,
and a set of critical questions. My work will be eclectic, embodying many
approaches—structural, dialogic, new historicist, pragmatic, myth-critical,
multiethnic—with a considerable degree of critical self-consciousness in
the contemporary mode. I want to enter into dialogue what was facing
Puzo as a writer after World War II with what facing Puzo causes me to
notice in critical revolutions after the New Criticism in my reading choices
as critic.
       I do not render judgments on Puzo and The Godfather as much as
situate him and his text, as I attempt to situate myself on several levels
of American literary discussion. To decide finally on ways Puzo and The
Godfather can be approached is to grant the author and his text a different
sort of complexity than is usually called for in critical study. It’s not a
problem of worrying about Puzo and his novel not being complex enough;
it’s making the acknowledgment that writing about popular authors and
their fictions is complex. The level of difficulty is complicated by the popu-
lar writer’s strengths and weaknesses, the culture’s rewards and neglect,
the critic’s training and goals. Thus levels of contradiction and irony re-
surface at the level of a metacriticism that necessarily will be about “criti-
cal thinking on popular phenomena.” For the critic to earn that role, he
must bring emotion, reason, and training but also admit his insecurities
about illicit reading pleasures as well as his yearnings for wholeness,
justice, and closure. I come to Puzo in writerly sympathy but scrutinize
his career by critiquing the legend of the Corleones that America has
wholeheartedly consumed for decades. I want to bring forth as much as
6                   The Godfather and American Culture



I can about what the Corleone hegemony reveals about Puzo’s fiction,
the Godfather films, and, by extension, American popular texts, their crit-
ics, and general readers.


                     Siting “The Godfather”

      Siting The Godfather involves displaying its text in different seman-
tic arguments. I place Puzo’s novel in comparison with an elite novel,
Doctorow’s Ragtime (chapter 7), discuss it as fostering a tradition of mob
narrative that presently culminates in The Sopranos (chapter 9), and hy-
pothesize it as a Cold War text, a mega best-seller, a social melodrama,
an ethnic novel, a popular novel. At all times, I’m aware of how the three
Godfather films became the Godfather text for millions. Each such siting
changes The Godfather’s configuration and adds to its status as a narrative
phenomenon. Leslie Fiedler comments that a key facet of a true popular
narrative is its “transparency,” the ease at which it can be transferred
from fiction to film (What Was Literature 122). A significant popular nar-
rative generally does not have the originality or complexity to master or
cover other texts with its uniqueness but instead takes on within its
conventionality something of the site in which it is described. The God-
father is not a strong text but one that accrues meanings to it. Within this
concept is a kind of antidiversity, a magnetizing site that absorbs, much
as does Corleone power itself.
      Such meanings, cultural formations, and vehicles sited by interac-
tion with The Godfather include the concept of the family itself in America,
both traditional and contemporary, the social entity with the largest sig-
nification; the best-selling novel read by millions, which affirms certain
values within both sensational and sentimental frames; film and televi-
sion in its adaptations; and an ethnic habitare or sociological habitus that
can tell us about a novel or its characters’ geographical place or the
writer’s place within a system of cultural capital. Sites can be social
formations (Business, Family, the Mob, Crime); historical and cultural
formations (Immigration, Cold War, Self-Made, Success, Pluralism, Isola-
tion, “Old World,” “New World,” Destiny, Manifest Destiny); as well as
literary genres and forms (popular, elite, myth, epic, melodrama, senti-
ment). A variety of critical paradigms can offer different sitings: New
Historicism, Ethnic Criticism, Marxist Criticism, Myth Criticism, Literary
Sociology, Cultural Studies, and Reader Response Criticism. Finally, The
Godfather can now be sited as product and as part of the language. No
current American fictional and film text is more quoted in films, televi-
sion, books, advertising, and through brand names. The Godfather is
mimed, mined, and strip-mined for its meanings in what has become
“Godfather America.”
                                Introduction                               7



       Why The Godfather and why now, given the huge plurality of popu-
lar narratives extant at any moment? Historically, The Godfather is funda-
mentally a Cold War text about post–World War II with Michael Corleone
as the soldier-son coming home first to wage war and then to keep the
peace through threat and massive deterrence while presiding over a wary
détente with his enemies (the other Families). No other American best
seller mythically deals with this tense American period as does The God-
father; film counterparts in this vein may be The Best Years of Our Lives
(1946) and It’s a Wonderful Life (1946), affirmative American visions with
hysteric edginess. The Godfather narrative is also an uncomplicated ethnic
novel, not really dialogized in relation to Italian America as much as it
is in thrall to popular melodrama; immigration and urban ethnicity go
down easy in its text. When the novel appears in 1969, it does so at a
time of enormous stress for the American father and family, at the end
of a decade when the Vietnam war split countless fathers and sons and
the country itself in debates over patriotism and duty. When the Civil
Rights movement had in the 1960s begun to educate Americans in dra-
matic fashion about the right to claim what is justly yours in the name
of oppressed identity on the one hand and American ideals on the other.
Vito and Michael Corleone do not grow apart: they unite to kill the bas-
tards and proclaim their family’s rights. The Godfather may be the very
expression of American capitalism with money and murder as constants,
with the attendant ironies surrounding the Corleone isolation from or
participation in pluralism, the economy, American systems of justice, and
politics. Even after three decades, The Godfather’s continuing reception
occurs in a climate of its own powerful shaping, as well as in a critical and
social climate of multiethnic consciousness, identity politics, and an on-
going debate about the differences underlying both essentialism and its
opposite. The Godfather has become a popular classic, exhibiting features of
American social life that transcend the era of its writing, filming, and
initial reception, as well as deeply situated in an American dialogue that
continues to evolve through fresh vehicles such as The Sopranos. The con-
stants firmly mixed in The Godfather continue to enthrall: America. Citizen-
ship. Family. Ethnicity. Identity. Business. Reason. Murder.


         Novels, Films, and Product Disclaimers

       I’m not talking in this book about Coppola’s three Godfather films as
separate from Puzo’s novel, nor am I particularly interested here in the
critical issue of “book into film.” Coppola is on record as stating that The
Godfather was to him an initially unpromising vehicle for adaptation: “I
was desperate to give the film class. I felt the book was cheap and sensa-
tional” (New York 52). Although Puzo shared screenwriting credits with
8                    The Godfather and American Culture



Coppola, it was Coppola who tightened the family melodrama, straight-
ened out the narrative’s chronology, removed some of Puzo’s more egre-
giously sensational moments, such as Lucy Mancini’s operation or the
satirical brothel of over-aged stars in Hollywood.1 When Coppola assumed
artistic control over Godfather II and Godfather III, the Corleone saga became
ever darker and more melancholy, exceedingly formal in its composition.
After completing Godfather I, Coppola commented that “it’s not really about
the Mafia. It could just as well be about the Kennedys or the Rothschilds,
about a dynasty which demands personal allegiance to a family that tran-
scends even one’s obligations to one’s country” (52). Coppola’s broad
thematizing is much in evidence here. He surpasses in scope anything that
Puzo claimed for his novel but actually was quite faithful in transposing
Puzo’s novel to the screen; there’s less disconnect between book and movie
than in most such adaptations. For one thing, The Godfather as novel was
quite free of exposition, character reflection, and subjectivizing. With no
novel sequel by Puzo, the saga passed more exclusively into film, to be
copied repeatedly by cinema and television in the succeeding decades. No
doubt the mob narrative comes down to us visually. Melodrama in its
broad strokes and emotional tenor is very vivid in drama, opera, and film.
Gangster melodramas have been a staple in film since the earliest days of
silent film. In a narrative obsessed with “destiny,” it may be that The
Godfather was destined to leave the page for large and small screens.
       Some ground rules should be mentioned about the countless refer-
ences to The Godfather in the succeeding chapters. I will refer to Puzo’s
novel as The Godfather and to the three films as Godfather I, Godfather II,
and Godfather III. When I refer to Puzo’s novel and Coppola’s films as a
unit, I’ll designate them as Godfather narrative. When I want to talk about
the entire production of books, films, and their adaptations and spin-offs,
I am designating this generic product as mob narrative. Beyond such
definite namings, The Godfather is a site of a heterogeneous pluralism of
meanings that has established itself in a culture’s styles, language, and
advertising; it has become what is marketed and what markets other
products and images. Such will be referenced when necessary but a full-
field description of this phenomenon is not attempted here. I will have
much to say in this book about a “popular narrative,” most often in the
guise of The Godfather but often denoting a text of wide readership and
acceptance that flies below the radar screen of the academy and literary
criticism but that attracts a huge audience. Some of its properties can be
sketched here prefatory to extended discussion.
       Fiedler in What Was Literature provides perhaps the most pointed
descriptions of popular narrative. He finds the narrative residing in the
public domain, dealing more in images than words, and capable of pass-
ing easily into powerful (if not complex) film. Fiedler—whose prose is
always naughty and overheated where pop is concerned—describes
popular narrative’s messages as more transparent, not meeting aesthetic
                               Introduction                               9



or ethical standards beneath their “pious veneer,” but rather “pandering
to desires and lusts” (122). I would add that popular narrative also works
in hallowed visuals of family and through family rites of passage. To
gauge such power, I will repeatedly consider The Godfather’s mixture of
extreme violence and domestic warmth, again and again the most pow-
erful visual images in Godfather narrative. Such is also the most powerful
expression of popular narrative, and mob families present it in a most
inclusive form.
      Some firm product disclaimers are in order in the wake of The
Godfather’s enormous popularity as novel and films and the resultant
penetration into audience consciousness of countless millions:
     • The position of “godfather” in traditional religious and family
       structure is not coextensive with The Godfather or invented by
       Puzo but is a deeply traditional, hallowed, and serious part of
       extended family and community life. Godparents are not only
       Catholic and not only Italian.
     • Mob narrative is not coextensive with Italian American narrative.
       The full richness of Italian American life is presented in a litera-
       ture that is now in full flowering, both in fiction and in criticism
       (see chapter 4). Without becoming some sort of literary-critical
       action wing of the anti-defamation police, be it here said that mob
       narrative is only my copyright and is not code for “Italian Ameri-
       can” in its fullness but will have reference to ethnic criticism as
       well as a host of other criticisms.
     • The Godfather is not the first or final word on the presence of the
       Mafia in Italian or Italian American culture and life. Conscious-
       ness of the Mafia did not begin in Italian America because of
       Puzo; rather, Puzo’s writing reflects aspects of Italian America,
       and he disseminates his interpretation to millions. Italian Ameri-
       cans don’t need to read or view Godfather texts to know their
       heritage or condition, and The Godfather did not create any value
       system that was news to American immigrants from Sicily and
       southern Italy. Furthermore, I respect Italian American reactions
       to Godfather narrative in their full complexity, whether they se-
       cretly admire or openly loathe The Godfather or feel a complex
       mixture of pride, identification, and frustration in its stereotyp-
       ing. It’s a curious fate to be an “unprotected” ethnic minority
       where all bets are off in contemporary politically correct discourse.

       The Common Languages of Mob Narrative

     Remarkable visual examples of the mixture of violence and domes-
tic warmth stud The Godfather films. In Godfather II, after young Vito
10                  The Godfather and American Culture



Corleone kills Fanucci, the minor neighborhood “Black Hand” mafioso
on the Lower West Side of New York City, he returns home through the
busy streets to his own front stoop, where his wife sits with their three
small sons, in the midst of other bustling families and lives. The scene is
an ethnic tableau; an old grandmother sits on a higher stoop; a man with
a mandolin is visible right above Vito’s shoulder. Mother holds toddler
Fredo. Above her sits three-year-old Sonny dressed in an outfit that looks
like soldier’s garb; he waves a toy American flag, and Fredo holds an-
other flag in his chubby fist. Vito takes infant Michael still wrapped in
his baby blankets and says to him in Italian, “Michael, your father loves
you very much, very much.” He holds Michael’s tiny fingers almost in
wonder at such perfection.
       Such a scene is a seamless mixture of family love, ethnic type-scene
nostalgia, and melodramatic presentation. The young “Mama” Corleone
looks off to the side, heedless of the camera. The very young children are
fidgeting in anticipatory blankness. The shot almost becomes an extended
still photograph in an album of ethnic urban immigration. The scene is
evocative of the great photographs of New York tenement life dating back
to Jacob Riis. Vito has done his day’s work by killing Fanucci, and his
family may now prosper. Something amazing has occurred, but it is por-
trayed in the mundanity of the street. Such a scene takes place in the
public domain and is transmitted through the powerful images of patrio-
tism, ethnic richness, family solidarity, and maternal and paternal love.
Any ethical imperative against murder is canceled by Vito’s strong pres-
ence. Here is where his power begins.
       Beneath the piety of the young family man with his brood is a killer.
Vito steps into full American adulthood by killing a man as will his son
Michael. By 2000, Tony Soprano, the struggling inheritor of Vito’s tale and
responsibilities, kills a mob informant while taking his daughter on a col-
lege tour, a new rite of the American upper middle class (Sopranos 1, 5).
During her admissions interview at Bowdoin, Tony gazes at a wall with an
inscription from Nathaniel Hawthorne (Bowdoin 1825): “No Man Can Wear
One Face to Himself and Another to the Multitude without Finally Getting
Bewhildered as to Which May Be True.” The path from that stoop in Little
Italy where the Corleones sit to Tony in the anteroom at Bowdoin is three
generations and, pace Hawthorne, the Corleones and the Sopranos are
getting on rather well in their contradictions. Tony, bewhildered, has been
“true” in his fashion. In the narrative of manners that The Sopranos can
become, Tony also makes a belated “moral” decision not to order a hit on
his daughter’s sexually compromised high school soccer coach, thus inter-
twining the mob’s reach with the suburbs’ most upscale current family
reality. He tumbles drunkenly into his own living room late at night,
mumbling, “I didn’t hurt nobody. Call the shrink. Town oughta give her
a fuckin’ bonus” (Sopranos 1, 9). The constants in mob narrative are murder
and family; the frames are updated in middle-class scenarios. Film and
                                Introduction                             11



television provide such vividness, while the visual images move to fill the
silences that omerta dictates.
      One issue to place under extended discussion is the Amerian
audience’s extension of sympathy to killer families, to bring them into
our gang. Family bonds appear to innoculate mob murder against any
moral constraints. Once a character is a “made” man, anything is pos-
sible in the range of human conduct. The aura of the kill hangs over
every human action. Fisher in Hard Facts writes of nineteenth-century
sentimentality’s “experimental extension of humanity” to “prisoners,
slaves, madmen, children, and animals” (100), to which we can now add
murdering families. Cross DeLena in Puzo’s The Last Don observes that
once he “made his bones,” “he should never be subject to the fates of
ordinary men” (175), almost as if he becomes another species. Indeed,
mob narrative authorized by Puzo is joined by the vampire narratives of
Anne Rice to provide nuclear families who live with murder every day,
who have it as a necessity, the constant transformative power of murder’s
violence. Vampire and Mafia families have murder as their “nature,”
grounding a popular exceptionalism that leads to an extraordinarily
unstable moral landscape for the audience. How authors, books, and
films negotiate this terrain of killer families will be the business of this
book to describe and unpack. What Fisher sees as the “central psycho-
logical and social evil” of slavery in family in the nineteenth-century
domestic novel (101) becomes the evil of murder for the sake of money
in contemporary mob narrative. Murder or its threat keeps the money
coming. The Corleone and Soprano destruction of family itself is the
primary result of the lives of the murderers themselves and the conse-
quences for the women and children they purport to protect.
      The silences of The Godfather far outweigh its disclosures and pro-
vide a throwback text to Hemingwayesque silent heroism without
Hemingway’s evoked tension. Jewish American fiction hasn’t stopped
talking since Saul Bellow announced early in Dangling Man (1944), “If
you have difficulties, grapple with them silently, goes one of their com-
mandments. To hell with that! I intend to talk about mine, and if I had
as many mouths as Siva has arms and kept them going all the time, I still
could not do myself justice” (9), and Philip Roth’s Alexander Portnoy in
1969, the year of The Godfather’s publication, took the impulse about as
far as he could. By the 1960s, the confessional mode had fundamentally
taken root in both American fiction and American poetry. Since 1969,
most contemporary multiethnicity is also about claiming one’s own voice
and announcing self through becoming a speaking subject. This insur-
gent view of power/knowledge also belongs to a fictional revolution of
women and gays, to move from being border citizens to the center of
fiction. Italian American male silence was one prominent hold-out against
the powerful trend and in Puzo, remained inherently conservative sim-
ply by its reticence, in the refusal to join in narcissistic subjectivity.2
12                  The Godfather and American Culture



       The Mob has become a region that is a serious sensationalizing and
distilling of a larger Italian American experience and culture. Inevitably
in this book The Godfather rises to dominate both considerations of the
serious religious and cultural institution of godparents, as well as a larger
Italian American culture that so very clearly is not contained by the
boundaries of mob narrative. At the same time, Puzo did not invent out
of whole cloth the myth of the Mafia in Italian American life. It’s cultur-
ally and historically grounded and already glorified and romanticized on
a smaller, less mainstream scale over decades and even centuries. An
initially excluded and wary immigrant population did not need Puzo to
become the fictional laureate of ethnic Robin Hoods. The Corleones may
have been introduced to American culture at large via the novel and
films. Such minor neighborhood figures were always in the generic Ital-
ian American culture, outwitting an inscrutable distant system, doing
“what everyone else does,” according to their own lights, getting by,
getting over, getting on with the business of family and life, and provid-
ing respect, a commodity in short supply among the urban poor. The
Godfather creates a common language for America out of this more local-
ized culture; it did not inaugurate the culture itself.3
       This common language of mob narrative can be situated in various
ways. The history of American fiction also moves beyond the obvious
formal categories of Realism, Naturalism, and the Sentimental Novel and
becomes the history of various regionalisms that can be broadly defined
as that of the “New England Mind,” or the “Southern Way of Life” or the
“Frontier” (Fisher 241). I want to suggest that mob narrative itself can
become a region, one with its own rituals of family marriage and death,
ethnic and religious observance, customs in everything from food to
conduct, and a world view that is strongly conditioned by both the pre-
immigrant experience of oppression in the descent country and the con-
sciousness that must adapt that prior experience in America. Mob narrative
is not coextensive with Italian American narrative but is rather an off-
shoot from it, hybridized by the experience of many ethnic and/or op-
pressed groups that are suspicious of the law. Mobsters have everything
you don’t: power, money, women, cars, security, and most of all, a certain
leverage. Mob narrative then seeks to link systems of power and author-
ity in the “Old Countr[ies]” with what is perceived in the American
social and legal system with the goal of finding out how to survive
economically and culturally in a “New World.”


            Alan Greenspan and George Bailey:
                 “Doing It for Strangers”

     An alternative to this parochial, wary, and cautious ethnic narrative
does exist. Fisher also conceives of a powerful core culture of American-
                               Introduction                             13



ization comprised of public education, economic advancement, and demo-
cratic civic culture (241) that provides both an alternative to the region-
alisms and an effective absorption of them in what authorizes participation
in a public sphere.4 Puzo makes some scant obeisances toward this other
America when Michael Corleone talks about his family joining the “gen-
eral American destiny,” but for the most part, mob narrative refuses to
believe that things as they are will be changed when played upon
America’s schoolrooms, offices, military barracks, and suburbs. Mob
narrative usually treats these strong American determinants as inert
opposing environments, rather than the coopting forces, the “melting
pots” that need to consume the “regions” of anti-American resistance
in order to function in power. Mob narrative in general refuses to
dialogize with this idealized core America. Whatever else mob narra-
tive accomplishes, it has few illusions about an American business cul-
ture that rather piously refuses to see mob narrative’s predations as its
own mirror self.
      American economic and family culture constantly seeks narratives
and heroes to regulate and explain our national life. The culture is con-
stantly engaged in discourses about home, family, money, greed, and
security and does not only search for reinforcement and insight through
the extreme violence and sensation of mob narrative but also in other
more benign and constrained forms. Vito and Michael Corleone are not
the only fantasy figures who embody American hopes and economic
dreams. Briefly consider two other American heroes: Wall Street’s Alan
Greenspan as all-powerful father and Bedford Falls’ George Bailey in It’s
a Wonderful Life as redeeming son.
      Greenspan, the longtime chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank, is
the most frequently cited patriarchal overseer of the incredible American
boom economy and stock market run-up of the 1990s, the man who has
unequaled power to keep the American economy on course. Greenspan
is a father who will keep his children from being too indulgent, whose
job is to calm financial markets and maintain their stability. He’s a
publically appointed official operating in the lifeworld at the highest
level of government power, which has voluntarily ceded control of the
financial system to him. In the early 1960s, Greenspan wrote that “capi-
talism holds integrity and trustworthiness as cardinal virtues and makes
them pay off in the marketplace” (New Yorker, 168). Greenspan becomes
a benign patriarch of an eagerly acquisitive national family prospering
unimaginably under his rule. Greenspan has been candid about his intel-
lectual debt to Ayn Rand with whom he studied as a young man: “What
she did . . . was to make me think about why capitalism is not only effi-
cient and practical, but also moral,” he told the New York Times in 1974
(Cassidy, New Yorker 167). Rand’s long novels such as Atlas Shrugged
(1943) and The Fountainhead (1957) provided a popular fictional account
of American capitalism and the priorities of the truly strong men in its
14                  The Godfather and American Culture



system, matched only by the Corleones. The irony is that Greenspan
works for all America. Rand and Puzo’s heroes work for themselves and
for family, respectively.
      George Bailey is the small-town hero of Frank Capra’s It’s a Won-
derful Life, who stays at home after his father’s death and heroically
navigates his struggling savings and loan company against the evil Mr.
Potter and his big bank on behalf of the “little people” who need afford-
able housing during the Great Depression and World War II. George can
never break away from Bedford Falls; it’s his brother, Harry, who goes off
to be a war hero like Michael Corleone. George becomes, by the end of
Capra’s tale, “the richest man in town” emotionally, one who overcomes
a real hysteria about not breaking away from family and home to build
and finance homes, to become a hero to people in a nascent melting pot.
Finally he is recalled to life after despair, is “touched by an angel” and
restored to family, which includes an extended grateful American public.
Here is Fisher’s dream of an American core culture triumphing since
George sacrifices himself for “the people” who are outside any family or
specific ethnic group. They are transferred from “customers” into working-
class Americans who trust him and redeem him. George Bailey—always
about to leave home and always turned back to it—does everything “for
strangers,” as Don Corleone would say.
      This public ethic of sacrifice and service in It’s a Wonderful Life, a
“family classic,” a film largely igonored and forgotten after World War II,
becomes a television phenomenon in the early 1970s about the time of
the Godfather takeover of economic life through mob narrative on film.
George Bailey, however, is a benign capitalist hero. His demons are his
own, and his violence is often inner-directed. The hard-working families
on whose behalf George Bailey struggles take on a different caste in
Italian American culture and narrative. It’s crucial to recognize that Puzo
hardly invented the hierarchical narrative of Old World suspicion of
American life and promises and that the entire system of a “godfather”
made perfect sense to immigrant families who were looking for any sort
of protection against an American world that was arrayed against their
survival. What mob narrative has converted into something sensational
and ominous is a traditional serious aspect of Italian and then Italian
American social cohesion. How to convert the clannishness of family
unity into real power to control the vagaries of life in a new country?
Gardaphe cites Richard Gambino’s portrayal of that hierarchical Italian
American family order:

     From top to bottom : 1. family members, “blood of my blood,”
     2. compari and padrini and their female equivalents, commare
     and madrine (“godparents,” a relationship that was by no means
     limited to those who were godparents in the Catholic religious
                                Introduction                              15



     rites . . . and which would better translate as “intimate friends”
     and “venerated elders”), 3. amici or amici di cappello (friends to
     whom one tipped one’s hat or said “hello”), meaning those
     whose family status demanded respect, and 4. stranieri (strang-
     ers), a designation for all others.” (Gambino, Blood of My Blood,
     in Gardaphe, Italian Signs, American Streets 86)

      The concept of a ‘godfather’ has been seriously chosen by vulner-
able people for protection down through the centuries. Gardaphe con-
ceives it as embracing the nuclear family, that the order of the family
works like the walls around a castle (86). This feudal imagery is apt to
describe what looks like an archaic structure pragmatically implanted
within a modern democratic capitalist society. Thus assumptions about
the communal life of a shared American society are nonexistent within
this system. Equality is a fiction, consensual law would not protect any-
one sufficiently. The differences are stunning.
      None of the architecture of this Italian family order would yield
any part of its network of relations to a public sphere of institutions and
keepers of the public order and law. The one part of a shared sense of
liberal freedom that the Italian American family and the American civic
family might share would be the ideal of the strong and benevolent
father to take care of both family and an unimpeded business life. This
common bond cements the huge acceptance of the Corleone and Soprano
families by the American readership and viewing audience. By audience
vote, they have become Our Gangs.


                        A Chapter Preview

       This book is divided into three parts. Part 1 of “The Godfather” and
American Culture attempts to understand the issues and stakes involved
in popular fiction study in the realm of aesthetics and morals and to
chronicle and align Puzo’s career with these issues and stakes to estab-
lish the critical and authorial backgrounds for reading The Godfather.
Chapter 1 introduces the major questions to be asked in a study of popu-
lar fiction and of The Godfather in particular with relation to the history
of “taste” and the power of sentiment in moral criticism. Chapter 2 works
through Puzo’s long career to gauge his ambitions and achievements. For
a writer who became famous depicting the Italian American subject in
The Godfather, Puzo actually devoted a considerable part of his writing
career to avoid being defined by that subject or by popular success itself.
       Part 2 of “The Godfather” and American Culture works through read-
ing paradigms for The Godfather that also are models for further criticism
of popular fiction. Chapter 3 reads key scenes of confrontation in the
16                  The Godfather and American Culture



novel by way of Bakhtinian dialogics to ascertain the dynamic of author-
ity and internal persuasion that Puzo nervously allows to surface from
time to time in a challenge to the Corleone hegemony. Chapter 4 subjects
the Bakhtinian model to criticism by ethnic ensemble to find how the
specifically Italian and Sicilian backgrounds and rhetorical language
troping as well as cultural analysis can account for facets of the text that
seem either underdeveloped or contradictory according to more univer-
sal paradigms. Chapter 5 tries by way of reference to Barthes’s Mytholo-
gies to account for the investiture of some loaded ideological messages
within specific character zones in The Godfather. Part 2 of this book
suggests that a critical reader can approach The Godfather armed with
the most cogent of contemporary critical theories but must be ready to
find how these theories illuminate the text and also create problems
that place the entire project of reading popular fiction into subjective
and intertextual relation.
      Part 3 of this study concentrates on positioning The Godfather in
relation to both elite and popular American fiction and to film and tele-
vision. Fiction and films that engage countless millions of readers and
viewers for decades do so not only by catching the zeitgeist, or by their
intrinsic properties, however conceived by whatever critical paradigms,
but also by existing in a literary-historical era, narrative tradition, and a
field of texts. Most important, The Godfather exists within structures of
feeling, with particular reference to melodrama, sentiment, and Ameri-
can history. I test the potential of The Godfather to enter certain estab-
lished American literary conversations and chart the sustaining course of
mob narrative in language, literature, and media. Chapter 6 begins by
considering The Godfather as the last twentieth-century entry in an Ameri-
can business saga dating to the early 1900s; it looks at The Godfather as
a late inheritor of a compelling success narrative that America always
stands ready to read through melodrama at the level of the popular
novel, particularly through the mutation and absorption of traditional
female roles by men who do prove able to have it all in the family and
in the murderous, perfidious workplace, which become and occupy the
same space and entity. Chapter 7 performs a specifically comparative
study of The Godfather with Doctorow’s Ragtime, its elite literature twin
in many respects. Chapter 8 defines The Godfather within Fiedler’s con-
cept of the American “inadvertent epic” and surveys how the epic sub-
ject informs the novel that has now entered our language, dreams, and
culture in many media forms. Chapter 9 concludes the book with an
analysis of The Sopranos as the most suggestive contemporary inheritor of
The Godfather’s conventions and premises.
                Part I
Popular Fiction Criticism
  and American Careers
This page intentionally left blank.
                    chapter one


                 Popular Fiction:
            Taste, Sentiment, and the
               Culture of Criticism
Taste is basically an ability to judge the [way in which] moral ideas are
made sensible ([it judges this] by means of a certain analogy in our reflec-
tion about [these ideas and their renderings in sensibility]); the pleasure that
taste declares valid for mankind as such and not just for each person’s
private feeling must indeed derive from this [link] and from the resulting
increase in our receptivity for the feeling that arises from moral ideas (and is
called moral feeling).
                       —Immanuel Kant, “On Methodology Concerning Taste”
                                            in Critique of Aesthetic Judgment

It is natural for us to seek a standard of taste; a rule by which the various
sentiments of men may be reconciled; at least a decision afforded, confirming
one sentiment, and condemning another.
                                    —David Hume, “Of the Standard of Taste”

Our interpretation of a work and our experience of its value are mutually
dependent, and each depends upon what might be called the psychological
“set” of our encounter with it: not the “setting” of the work, or in the
narrow sense, its context, but rather the nature and potency of our own
assumptions, expectations, capacities, and interest in respect to it—our
“prejudices” if you like, but hardly to be distinguished from our identity (or
who, in fact we are) at the time of the encounter.
                             —Barbara Herrnstein Smith, Contingencies of Value

     I begin by establishing certain questions to be asked of Puzo’s in-
credible success in The Godfather and, by extension, that of any phenomenal
best seller. What draws me as critic to this popular writer and to this

                                      19
20                               Chapter 1



narrative phenomenon? What training and praxis inform both the way I
frame my questions and the evidence I choose to examine? I want to
chart the inevitable questions and false starts that face the literary critic
when confronting a work of such massive popularity as The Godfather
with the goal of beginning to outline my rationale for a particular set of
readings at a number of sites. The largest questions about these issues
have everything to do with establishing a rationale for moral criticism in
a pluralist culture that enables sentiment to be a powerful arbiter of
judgment without completely privileging its contingent quality.
      To set the issues in their purest form, I return briefly to the
eighteenth-century debate over reason and sentiment as they inform judg-
ments of taste in moral philosophy. The two most cogent figures must be
Kant and Hume, the prominent architects of our modern view of feelings
and judgments and the ways in which they form our concepts of the
beautiful, the moral, and the ethical. Kant credits Hume with his awak-
ening to the primacy of the world of experience over the world of ideas.
Much of what would underwrite the authority of criticism in our time
takes its shape through Kant’s majestic formulations of the aesthetic, the
beautiful, and the sublime and how the critic is vested or “disinterested”
in the judgments. Such maxims in Kant’s Critiques have licensed a twen-
tieth-century pursuit of “art for art’s sake,” a denial of historicizing, a
formalization of the critical power, an austerity beyond the sensible into
a realm where art is perceived as higher and higher. No elite judgment
of critical consistency can be truly made without Kantian underwriting.
Yet Kant also provides the strongest basis for our inquiry into moral
judgments that cohere within and without the aesthetic impulse.
      Hume’s more visceral and hedonistic embracing of the sentimental
as a basis for moral apprehensions and evaluations is where Kant and
Hume part company in the extreme. Hume calls for a more subjective
and capacious view of the human responding imagination, one that re-
flects a “broader discipline of reflection on human nature” (Baier Progress
25) In an appendix to An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals en-
titled “Concerning Moral Sentiment,” Hume wrote, “But though reason,
when fully assisted and improved, be sufficient to instruct us in the
pernicious or useful tendency of qualities and actions; it is not alone
sufficient to produce any moral blame or approbation. . . . It is requisite
a sentiment [italics Hume] should here display itself, in order to give a
preference to the useful above the pernicious tendencies. This sentiment
can be no other than a feeling for the happiness of mankind, and a
resentment of their misery” (125). For writers who are conscious advo-
cates, either moral or ethical about justice, equality, and freedom within
society, Hume gives great cause. The credo about sentiments as moral
guides leads not only to the ideals of a document such as the American
Declaration of Independence (“happiness of mankind”/”pursuit of happi-
                                Popular Fiction                              21



ness”) but to an identification with society and its social arrangements
and inequities (“resentment of their misery”).
      Hume is willing to undertake a dangerous tacking amidst issues,
scenes, and effects. The critic’s lot is always to feel he is overstepping
emotional bounds and to pull back in this or that stay against his full
range of feeling. Hume knew this when he wrote, “I am uneasy to think
that I approve of one object and disapprove of another; call one thing
beautiful, and another deform’d; decide concerning truth and falsehood,
reason and folly, without knowing upon what principles I proceed” (Baier
22). Although it is impossible to graft fully the sentiments of a great
eighteenth-century philosopher onto a current debate about the uses and
modes of literary criticism, it’s the methodological “uneasiness” Hume
knew as he constructed his case for sentiment that is fully repeated in the
contemporary critical establishment and was a staple of largely negative
comment throughout the twentieth century. Modernism’s brilliant refash-
ioning of historical, moral, and social chaos in the church of its literature
in the first half of the twentieth century was met and often influenced
and enhanced by an equally powerful and austere set of formalisms led
by the Anglo-American New Criticism as well as by various avant garde
manifestos in Dada, Futurism, and Surrealism. Modernism canceled sen-
timent by rigor, formalism, and experimentalism both in succession and
in concert. Postmodernism tends to treat Hume’s “uneasiness” in a more
relaxed pluralism of canonical and popular and refrains from judgment
when it can in favor of flattening out questions of the “moral” and the
“true” into equilibrated images and icons in fractured response.
      Another powerful initiative in our critical climate is a committed
social and gender-based multicultural fiction and criticism that counters
postmodernism’s more easily won pluralism with an instinctive commit-
ment to diversity. No period since the midnineteenth century is produc-
ing fiction or criticism of sentiment to a wider acclaim. In allied initiatives,
feminist criticism, New Historicism, and multiethnic criticism rise to
suggest that we re-read the last century and a half to find countermove-
ments in fiction through feeling as well as reason. Literary and culture
critics resurrect women’s domestic texts, slave narratives, and long for-
gotten best sellers, and attempt to chart the feelings of the reading public
as exhibited in what they wholly embraced as consumers. As critics we
may read in an attempt to find out what moves us, often not in a fiction
of great depth but rather in a fiction of varied surfaces where we attempt
to ascertain how our critical responses themselves can be considered
complex across a breadth of literary forms, social issues, and moral
imaginings. Therefore we constantly seek ways to integrate our reading
selves in differing contexts in which we confront our most elite and
popular texts. Hume conceived the two areas of sentiment and reason as
they might work together uneasily in our critical imaginings: “What is
22                                Chapter 1



honourable, what is fair, what is becoming, what is noble, what is gener-
ous, takes possession of the heart, and animates us to embrace and main-
tain it. What is intelligible, what is evident, what is probable, what is true,
procures only the cool assent of the understanding; and gratifying a specu-
lative curiosity, puts an end to our researches” (Hume 15). Hume antici-
pates, albeit pejoratively, Kant’s “disinterestedness” in which such judgment
shall not function beyond the identification of beauty or the sublime. To
Hume, a “speculative” inquiry is not enough; the “end to our researches”
cannot be allowed to forget what our “heart” tells us is “true.”
       To apply this maxim to a contemporary reading of The Godfather, it’s
therefore not enough to count the novel’s sales, label its genres, talk
about its myths, and carve its niche in a postmodern set of images, lan-
guage, gestures, and copies. Puzo’s novel, the three Godfather films, and
the numerous extensions of mob narrative speak to a wide range of
moral issues, chaotically raising vexing questions in our society about
what are “honor,” “fairness,” and “generosity”: our heart, as Hume knows,
is fully engaged by such material. Is Vito Corleone justified in taking that
first life on the Lower East Side of New York City? After the first Sicilian
American death, is there no other? Does all justification, all blessing flow
from this initial action? Yet, doesn’t Vito Corleone’s “generous heart”
come from his power and authority? Is this power not authorized by the
fact that he will take your life, demand, as Michael so indelicately relates
it, your “brains or [your] signature on that paper”? Finally, isn’t the Don
acting for one of the most noble of reasons, the familial? We inquire into
the nature of these arrangements and respond not only with our reason
but our visceral reaction to what we believe is happening in such a
powerful narrative transaction as The Godfather, one that is compelling
not because of its symbolic intricacy or ironic commentary but because
questions about our sympathies and affiliations are put so directly to us
and by us as readers that we cannot deny the challenge to our public
morality and private identities as parents, children, and family members
in a plurality of roles. Should fiction, particularly popular fiction, be held
to account for its commentary on such matters, and what would this
account have to do with literary criticism?
       Hume shows wit as well as a philosopher’s courage in commenting
on such dilemmas. He states that, “in many orders of beauty, particularly
those of the finer arts, it is requisite to employ much reasoning, in order
to feel the proper sentiment” (15). As critics, we can almost always find
a formalist rhetoric to demonstrate what affect we need to find. As teach-
ers, we can and do tell fiction and film classes words to the effect that
“you’ll notice when Sonny Corleone died in a hail of bullets at the toll
booth (or when Fredo was shot to death on Lake Tahoe), how Coppola
and Puzo achieved effects by depicting the scene as ‘caught in the middle,’
paying and paying, ‘taking its toll,’ between Long Island and New York
City, neither here nor there (or died saying ‘Hail Marys,’ as a fisher of
                                 Popular Fiction                               23



men, with Michael looking on ‘through a glass darkly’),” how an author
or director achieved distancing by depicting a scene (in a flashback, in a
dream sequence, stream-of-consciousness, through the music, through a
first-person narration, in slow motion). We call such motions establishing
a critical perspective as we perform the repertoire of critical rhetoric’s
power to demonstrate the aesthetics of any work over and above what
shatters us in the scene’s content and context. However, suppose we
want to stop and ask about agency. Who killed these Corleone sons, and
what will flow from that action? Who is guilty of what in this family, and
how does it relate to our lives? What are the consequences for the novel
and films and for society? Often the goal here in recounting such ex-
amples will be to describe fully the art of rendering the patterns of death
in The Godfather to show how Puzo imaginatively and rhetorically at-
tempts to make us understand and feel those patterns. How does the
understanding connect to the feeling? What do both have to do with the
reader-viewer’s pleasure and instruction?
      Once again, Hume to the front. His hypothesis is “that morality is
determined by sentiment. It defines virtue to be whatever mental action or
quality gives to a spectator the pleasing sentiment of approbation” (italics Hume)
(85). Sentiment itself is directly linked to the proving of the good and the
true, nor can there be any way to achieve the perception of these ends
without feeling. Hume continues: “it appears evident, that the ultimate
ends of human actions can never, in any case, be accounted for by reason
[emphasis Hume], but recommend themselves entirely to the sentiments
and affections of mankind, without any dependence on the intellectual
faculties” (87). Morality and sentiment cannot be severed, and it follows
that if sentiment is discounted or discredited, any moral statement in a
critical judgment will be very hard to mount or sustain before the disin-
terestedness that is seen to be proper when appraising art for its beauty
and truth. Therefore, not only might it traditionally be seen as bad form
to respond critically to The Godfather in the first place as a questionable
artifact, but it would also be a compounded crime to take seriously its
moral imaginings when sentiment is cancelled and morality is out of
bounds for criticism.
      The sheer breadth of individual response through sentiment is
potentially limitless. Kant quotes Hume in the Critique of Aesthetic Judg-
ment, specifically in book 2, “Analytic of the Sublime,” in a note observ-
ing that “there is a considerable diversity in the sentiments of beauty and
worth, and that education, custom, prejudice, caprice, and humour fre-
quently vary our taste of this kind” and that “beauty and worth are
merely of a relative nature and consist in an agreeable sentiment, pro-
duced by an object in a particular mind, according to the peculiar
structure and constitution of that mind” (Hume in Kant 149). This ex-
tended note on Hume’s more relaxed and expansive view of sentiment
appears to open a space for Kant through structures of feeling that
24                               Chapter 1



allow a critic to retain sentiments within aesthetic judgments. However,
Kant is actually more interested in demonstrating his seconding of Hume
regarding the absolute difference between each and every subject’s re-
sponding imagination.
       Moreover, Kant’s one extended passage on “sentimentality” in the
Critique of Aesthetic Judgment is a strongly negative attack on its excesses
and one that sets a strong precedent for later criticism. Although Kant
acknowledges that “affects” are beautiful and sensible, he delineates them
into categories of the “vigorous” and the “languorous.” Two centuries
later it is difficult not to code these affects immediately into male and
female, respectively, and to gauge the power and damage that such bi-
furcation has caused and continues to cause in the appraisal of feelings.
According to Kant, “vigorous affects” make us conscious that “we have
forces to overcome any resistance” and are “aesthetically sublime,” even
those of “desperation,” as long as that desperation is “indignant” rather
than “despondent.” However, an affect of the “languid kind,” which
never resists, “has nothing noble about it.” A further distinction between
“spirited emotions” and “tender ones” yields Kant’s view that when the
tender increases to the level of affects, “they are utterly useless: and a
propensity toward them is called sentimentality” (italics Kant) (Kant 133).
Kant thus installs a test of intensity for emotions. When that intensity
gives rise to an imbalance of feeling over reason, it is dangerously ener-
vating. Sentimentality will become the “bad” noun, triumphing over its
more respectable male parent sentiment and always associated with over-
indulgence, lassitude, and superficiality.
       Kant immediately tells his readers where to look for such a syn-
drome: where emotion as affect “creates a soul that is gentle but also
weak and that shows a beautiful side,” “fanciful” but not “enthusiastic.”
Such souls are addicted to “romances and maudlin plays; insipid moral
precepts that dally with (falsely) so-called noble attitudes but that in fact
make the heart languid and insensitive to the stern precept of duty.”
(133). Kant could here be describing Emma Bovary’s reading program or
that of Rousseau. Popular fiction in its highest form or on its best day
could never rise to Kant’s occasion, certainly no fiction that evinced any
passivity or tender openness, that by extension was written for and by
women. Kant in his Puritanism reads out any passionately personal
enjoyment: we’ll have none of that being carried away by heroes and
heroines here. Kant’s suspicions go as far back as Plato’s rhetorical con-
ceit in the Republic of banishing poets from his ideal Republic on account
of their imitation of virtue and their stirring up of the citizenry to no
good purpose.
      Kant continues with criticisms that the sentimental is harmful to
our self-reliance and leads to a false humility, a sort of craven Christian-
ity (anticipating Nietzschean discontents). Such “impetuous agitations”
must lead to a “pure intellectual purposiveness,” or else we are merely
                               Popular Fiction                            25



aroused gratuitously; sentimentality may be bad foreplay indeed. Thus
Kant’s own doctrine of “disinterestedness” when applied to taste and
beauty will not be allowed to apply to affects. To signify, such affects
must be placed in a purposive economy. Any sort of strong feeling of the
sublime must have reference “to our way of thinking“ (italics Kant), to
“maxims directed to providing the intellectual [side in us] and our ratio-
nal ideas with supremacy over sensibility” (134–35). It’s difficult to over-
estimate the influence of Kantian philosophy on all aspects of judgment
and taste in the literary culture of the twentieth century. Not only did
Kant call for the suppression of unregulated feeling in any system of
judgment, he also cast into sharp distinction the aesthetic power of judg-
ment set against the intellectual power of judgment, while again stress-
ing the need for both judgments to be rooted in “disinterest.” Kant wrote,
“And hence it seems not only that the feeling for the beautiful is distinct
in kind from moral feeling (as it indeed actually is), but also that it is
difficult to reconcile the interest which can be connected with the beau-
tiful with the moral interest, and that it is impossible to do this by an
alleged intrinsic affinity between the two” (“On Intellectual Interest in
the Beautiful” 165).
      Such a summary judgment on these two forms of judgment inheres
in the critical presuppositions and operational stances of some of the
most brilliant culture critics of the late twentieth century. For example,
Roland Barthes at the conclusion of Mythologies concludes that we are
doomed to speak “excessively” about reality, that the critic of culture
must either “poetize” or “ideologize” (158), must either work in aesthet-
ics or the political. Bourdieu after heroic labor through the intricate so-
ciological cataloguing of capital in Distinction, admits to a methodological
necessity in his “Postscript: Towards a ‘Vulgar’ Critique of ‘Pure’ Cri-
tiques” when he quotes Proust to stand for his own choices: “I have had
to struggle here with my dearest aesthetic impressions, endeavoring to
push intellectual honesty to to its ultimate cruelest limits” (485). Bourdieu
practices an austerity to match that of Kant on a different plane with
different goals. He refuses to believe in art even as Kant had crafted a
sensationless pleasure and writes of having to cultivate a “deliberate
amnesia,” a “readiness to renounce the whole corpus of cultivated dis-
course on culture” (485). Even though Bourdieu’s “Postscript” is a cri-
tique of Kantian critique, it is nonetheless caught in the terms that Kant
had set forth, in the perceptual “distinctions” that enable Distinction as a
text and theoretical program to come into being. Bourdieu defines the
“aesthetic disposition” as “a generalized capacity to neutralize ordinary
agencies and to bracket off particular ends” (54), and such would appear
to be a widely accepted estimate of Kantian critique in our time. Bourdieu
understands the “aesthetic sense as the sense of distinction itself” (56),
the ensemble of the various ways in which literature study validates its
discipline and takes to a high ground that knows not its own designation
26                                Chapter 1



but that moves surely to expunge any taint of historicizing or politicizing
on behalf of any critical rhetoric that would open new texts or new
spaces in canonical texts.


     Reading the Popular: Aesthetics, Morals, Taste

      In the arsenal of elite critical tools descended from Kant and invigo-
rated by Hume, what can be of practical use in approaching Puzo’s novel?
Defiantly materialistic, melodramatic rather than ironic, sensational rather
than realistic, pedestrian in style rather than intricate, often sexist, paro-
chial, vulgar—The Godfather resists traditional critical overtures and at-
tempts to speak of its power and value. Perhaps its “distinction” lies
precisely in having reached so many varied audiences without any of the
approved modes of distinction through literary capital, without an ap-
proved “poetizing” critique. Yet the narrative of The Godfather in novel
and films remains as an extraordinary fact and influence on millions of
readers and viewers all over the world. What is needed in its study is to
seek a supple “standard of taste,” in which the “various sentiments of
men may be reconciled” (Hume “Of the Standard of Taste” 309), and the
“propadeutic,” which Kant called for “that will truly establish our taste”
and aid in “developing our moral ideas and in cultivating moral feeling”
(232). Such a challenge in popular fiction criticism means nothing less
than striving for a re-association of sensibility between reason and feel-
ing in the service of raising issues about the moral transactions of mob
narrative in the life world of The Godfather.
      Kantian aesthetic value is phenomenologicially quite thin as op-
posed to the Humean account of aesthetics, which casts the formation in
this more social realm (Railton 88–90). Barbara Herrnstein Smith puts it
best when she comments, “As Hume’s detailing of the conditions affect-
ing human performance becomes richer and more subtle, his claim that
there is an objective standard of taste grounded in nature becomes weaker.
As Kant’s speculations of what would make a judgment of taste totally
objective becomes tighter, purer, and more foolproof, his demonstration
becomes more remote from conditions of any sublunary world” (70). For
the most part, I too will cast my vote with the party of Hume as realizing
more of taste and sentiment’s subjectivities in the belief that narratives
crucially depend on eliciting our moral beliefs and feelings to reach us as
readers (Carroll 141). Such activation of feelings will not yield a criticism
that is tidy or conclusive. This criticism will involve coming to under-
stand that the interrogation of a work such as The Godfather is perhaps to
question the very base of our moral understanding in the way fiction
plays us as readers. Noel Carroll identifies a class of narratives “that
pervert and confuse moral understanding by connecting moral principles,
concepts, and emotions to dubious particulars” (150). Hume himself had
                               Popular Fiction                            27



been troubled by works “where vicious manners are described, without
being marked with the proper characters of blame and disapprobation;”
he said that “we are displeased to find the limits of vice and virtue so
much confused” (315). The Godfather is a laboratory for such moral con-
flicts in reader identification, with so much mayhem from the heroes
while readers’ concepts of the larger society and citizenship are over-
turned, crime inscribed as business and vice versa, and the hallowed and
universal signification of family invoked whenever necessary. The cata-
logue of what the Family can become in The Godfather is almost endless
in its slippage: justification for any action, security for its members, out-
law band, prison house, immigrant cadre, heroic American business,
murderous corporation, fulfillment of the American Dream, myth of a
“Founding Father” and descendants.
       Carroll cites Martha Nussbaum who contends of the novel genre
that it “generally constructs empathy and compassion in ways highly
relevant to citizenship,” yet Carroll knows that the novel is not always
“beneficent” (156), that as an inclusive narrative of society, there are
moments in novels that trouble us greatly even as we are absorbed and
carried along by the plot and identification with the characters. Beryl
Gaut tries to relativize aesthetics when she writes, “A work of art may be
judged to be aesthetically good insofar as it’s beautiful, is formally uni-
fied and strongly expressive, but aesthetically bad insofar as it trivializes
the issues with which it deals and manifests ethically reprehensible atti-
tudes” (184). To adapt this maxim to The Godfather is complicated for the
novel’s melodramatic form is always overexpressive; the family is for-
mally unified, but the text is sprawling. Unity often becomes repetition
in which the same speeches on “destiny” or “cunning” are given indis-
criminately to different characters in a tedium of resemblances rather
than a delight of recognitions for the reader desiring to synthesize judg-
ments and make them whole. To show the relative trivializing of the
moral and ethical in The Godfather will be the business of chapters 3 and
5 here but in the context of attempting to account for such inscription in
any novel and how we make sense of it, according to a host of factors.
I don’t want to jettison aesthetics in this study but to make moral judg-
ments part of the judging of aesthetic judgment, to suggest that our “dis-
taste” may arise from a palpable sense that the form of the text through
its language can, in ways often hard to identify with precision, abuse our
view of the rightness of the sentiments expressed, the reasons posited in
the life-world of the novel.
       Hume would caution at the outset of such an errand that “taste is
not able to distinguish all the particular flavors amidst the disorder in
which they are presented” (311) and the continuum of taste would run
from its delicacy in the work of a master through the most sensational
and vacuous production of popular literature. Approbation is Hume’s hard-
working noun. Over and over again, he shows us the act of proving true:
28                               Chapter 1



true to the lifeworld of the characters, the sentiments of the author, the
shape of their civil society. All is played against and through the emo-
tional mindset of the reader, the genre in which it is cast, the times in
which it is read, and the critical sign under which it resides in a particu-
lar commentary. Hume observes the sheer diversity of taste and why we
almost always choose “a predilection for that which suits our particular
turn and disposition,” but his conclusion that “such preferences are in-
nocent and unavoidable and can never reasonably be the object of dis-
pute” (314) is absolutely contested in the dialogues that comprise the
critical discourse in the ideological climate in which we now read and
write at the beginning of the twenty-first century. No ethical judgment of
literature is currently seen to be innocent, and our narcissistic critical
meditations on our “dispositions” most often rise to eclipse the primary
text that nominally spurred us into song, Positioning our identity be-
comes more important than establishing our viewpoint.
       Kant traditionally staves off such performative anxiety. The ethical
and the aesthetic are woven together into the moral judgment, nor can
residual Kantian legerdemain render them separate in our time. Kant’s
weapons remain formidable, and we yearn toward them as powerful
traditional magic, even as we subvert their tenets. Kant’s “aesthetic power
of judgment,” the “ability to judge forms without using concepts” and to
make a “judgment . . . not based on an interest and also gives rise to
none” is a perfect double cordon sanitaire, absolving a critic from having
any ideologically formed positions or presuppositions. Why would he
need them since only beauty, perfectly apprehensible and of-and-for-
itself is the goal that further absolves the judgment of consequences or
agendas, as if the “judgers” did not come marked in so many ways by
living in the world. Such license to describe the aesthetic is of course the
heritage of Romanticism throughout the variety of heroic artistic indi-
vidualisms down through the modernists, cohering in every sort of artis-
tic product from Byron’s poetry to the alienated refrains of rock lyricists.
Yet the ways in which the aesthetic “covers” life and becomes a substi-
tute for it yields some very strange adherents. Puzo’s earnest statement
that “I believed in art for twenty five years. It gave me a comfort I could
find in no other place” suggests the fix that aesthetics was and was in by
the late twentieth century, a falsely sealed corner where any perception
could be indulged without consequence and with enormous formations
of exile, self-pity, isolation, and reflexive commentary. Bourdieu writes,
“The aestheticism which makes the artistic intention the basis of the ‘art
of living’ implies a sort of moral agnosticism, the perfect antithesis of the
ethical disposition which subordinates art to the values of the art of
living” (47). Bourdieu sentimentally sees that subordination as the em-
pirical wisdom of the working classes who cannot, for example see the
artful construction of a prize-winning photograph on poverty but in-
stead shudder at the plight of the human subject as “there but for certain
                               Popular Fiction                              29



minor moves in the economy or the grace of God go I” or who just have
instinctive sympathy for another human being, not mediated by art.1
       The “moral agnosticism” of aesthetics is of little use when a critic
of popular fiction wants to confront Puzo or any popular writer who
through sensational and melodramatic action elides the victims of his-
tory or confers magically their ability to fly by all nets of social constraint
and law to “take vengeance” to “save [my] family.”2 Thus Kantian aes-
thetics confers something of the same sense of being above the law as the
Corleone “family business” in The Godfather. In each case, both in high art
and high crime, the gesture is toward an absolution, a motion that does
not recognize laws or morality and considers itself above spatial and
temporal constraints as well as dialogue with other forces or constituted
collectivities. “Disinterestedness” is inimical to any protest against the
morality of fiction. Although Bourdieu writes that morality and agree-
ableness are the explicit norms of the working class, it must also be the
base of the popular readership, what he calls the “popular aesthetic”
(41). Yet just as surely, these norms are expressed in a false consciousness.
“Disinterestedness” is never an option for the popular readership or for
moral or ethical critics, and this, at least, is what they share. Bourdieu
writes that “nothing is more alien to popular consciousness than the idea
of an aesthetic pleasure that . . . is independent of the charming of the
senses,” which challenges Kant, who had said that taste that needed
“charm” and “emotion” had not emerged from “barbarism” (42).
       Therefore popular fiction and the taste culture confront each other
over what looks like insurmountable barriers to accommodation and
dialogue, complicated by the critic’s uneasy relation to assumed identi-
ties. I want to call on sentiment to reintroduce feeling into a discussion
of Puzo’s popular fiction, to become a bit melodramatic myself when
need be, to perhaps draw on sentiment as the very tool of the readership
itself, and to try to speak through that mask. The only way perhaps to
match Puzo’s impact is provisionally to mime his effects. If he opts out
of the system of elite fiction’s creation after The Fortunate Pilgrim, why
should I hold my ground there as critic since Puzo is talking about the
whole host of life-world issues that make me uneasy about my own
stubborn residence in formalist criticism? I meet him on the grounds of
his fiction when I wish to remain “interested” rather than “disinterested.”
Writing about morality and ethics is worth doing in relation to The God-
father because Puzo himself is raising such issues all the time in this
popular narrative. To abandon the search for his meanings because such
errands do not fit the historical caste of critical debate or are in debt to
the emotions and the sympathies would then suggest that we have no
way to engage this writer and fiction in dialogue. To refuse to meet
seriously a vastly popular text such as The Godfather on the grounds of
its largely pedestrian pronouncements about family, destiny, and immi-
gration is to forego an opportunity to understand where millions of people
30                               Chapter 1



have had their emotional and rational responses to these huge cultural
formations both confirmed and challenged. We cannot afford to wave off
The Godfather’s take on the subjects of American civil society, capitalism,
and its arrangements and say that they are all just manifestations of some
false consciousness or the “unconscious,” political or otherwise, or to be
degraded appetites or simplifications. Such is to do violence to the study
of this phenomenon. There will be moments when, unavoidably, I will
want to describe The Godfather in terms of something else, to void its
content and replace it with my own, to “expose” its gaps or inconsisten-
cies, but these rhetorical acts need not be primary or definitive. Just as
often, I will say that The Godfather is about exactly what it appears to be
about: Money, Family, Business, Immigrants. Negations and refusals are
never the whole story in complex response to popular fiction.
      Such a range of critical motion on taste allows for freer speculations
on its mediating power. Kant, Bourdieu, and Puzo are caught in varying
refusals. Kant demands “sensationless” pleasure. Bourdieu denies him-
self any aesthetic pleasure and then grimly sets about contextualizing the
sensible pleasures of the working class according to their being caught in
an economy that rules their response even as it rules that of their critics.
Puzo first flees his ethnic family, attempts an elite literature career, goes
bad to write an enormous best seller, then dissolves into complacent
reprise. In each case they are perhaps exemplifying a “fundamental re-
fusal of the facile” (486), which Kant describes as “pure taste.” The taste
culture will always be at odds with the popular, and intellectuals and
authors will warily affiliate with taste while just as warily maintaining
an attraction-repulsion to the facile: Kant through male sentiment,
Bourdieu through “rigor,” yet sympathy for the consuming class, Puzo
through his mystified worship of art where he might be Exhibit A in a
Bourdieuian analysis (see chapter 2 in this volume).
      Bourdieu is almost lyrical in his negativity and quite sensational
when he describes Kant’s taste that renounces the facile as “based on the
disgust that is often called ‘visceral’ ” (486). He evokes “easy virtue” and
the “easy lay,” and clearly the terms themselves when transcoded into
popular fiction suggest a prostituted or an adulterated text, some be-
trayal or lie of art, perhaps incarnated through Puzo’s declaration “I
wrote below my gifts in [The Godfather]” or in Michael’s famous kiss of
death in Godfather II in Havana when he passionately declares “I know
it was you, Fredo. You broke my heart.” In effect, Michael tells him that
he sold out the family for money and respect, got their brother Sonny
killed, and was complicituous in the attempt on the life of Michael, Kay,
and the children in the Lake Tahoe compound. Michael’s disgust is vis-
ible, his dis-taste enormous. His judgment is that Fredo has broken the
law, which is, in Kant’s terms, a law for everyone in the family. Michael’s
“judgment” gives rise to an “interest,” that Fredo must die; in the name
of family, Michael must kill family. Within the contorted morality that
                               Popular Fiction                            31



The Godfather posits, this is a moral choice, but one made out of disgust,
passion, and the power of judgment.
      Bourdieu leaves behind his “dearest aesthetic impressions” to prac-
tice sociology. Puzo practices popular literature by “writing below his
gifts.” Michael Corleone “goes bad” by killing Sollozzo and McCluskey
and thereby truly joins the family for the first time. Further ironies cross-
cut among the critic, the author, and the characters. Don Corleone has
“taste,” which separates him from his murderous peers. He is strait-laced
in matters of sex, and a man of reason, a statesman, full of disgust for the
actions of both his supplicants and his headstrong oldest son. To turn the
prism, critics know from their earliest training that to paraphrase and
transpose Don Corleone, “revenge [interpretation, evaluation] is a dish
best served cold.” Within the taste culture of aesthetics, even in an era
when aesthetics is in relative eclipse, the nominal critical act should not
raise one’s voice but reason, obfuscate, allude to, reformulate, and evis-
cerate taste-fully, armed with mighty weapons of philosophy, rhetoric,
and language. Who are more mandarin, above the fray, and disinterested
than Vito Corleone and his son, Michael? It’s Michael who is the family
inheritor, not Sonny, the violent, sexually potent son who brawls his way
through sensational scenes, a Corleone seemingly on loan from 1930s
Warner Brothers brash and visceral gangster epics. He is discredited
through dis-taste, as is the Cold War weapons system brute known as
Luca Brasi and the child seducer and horse lover Jack Woltz. The Godfa-
ther pronounces its own distasteful judgment on these figures.
      There’s no denying the fact that the critic would like to keep his
distance from the Corleone empire and its workings analogous to the
manner in which Don Corleone “launders” both his orders to kill and the
money he amasses. American fiction criticism in general wants to stay
away from the physical and material facts of murder and money. These
hard facts are resistant to a sustained formalist or ideological criticism
through any of the literary-critical tools in vogue at any time. The refusal
of criticism to confront a moral and violent muddle has its fictional ana-
logue in Michael Corleone’s initial refusal, almost disgust, with his own
family. Michael has to wean himself away from Dartmouth, his World
War II heroism, and his romance with Kay Adams to get back to the
family, where he becomes a success. There’s a parable in Michael’s tra-
jectory and justifications in what might be called the “Popular Subver-
sive.” Kant’s “Negative Magnitudes” in Critique of Judgment measure pure
taste by the intensity of denied impulse, by the highest degree of tension
(Bourdieu 490), and here we find something close to a principle of higher
prurience, the abstraction of the sensible and the coarse into a more
intellectual form. Such a ratcheting up of the emotional denial within the
very figure of the example defines quite well the symbolic American
Romance Paradigm, the inaugurating critical trope to canonize a run of
writers and tropes in the American 1850s (Poe, Melville, Hawthorne,
32                                 Chapter 1



blackness, whiteness, redness, but no slaves, masters, or Indians) by a
criticism taking dominion in the American 1950s. The genius of this in-
tensity centers on the hidden meaning, the symbolic complexity, the ironic
layering, the deflections from historical bodies onto “colors”—the move,
in short, to taste. Bourdieu quotes Derrida on the “arid pleasure” of
Kant’s critique (494, 600), and such a pleasure becomes a cornerstone of
the first generation of American Literature study in the academy after
World War II. Tellingly, such aridity within a coldly chosen symbolic
“pleasure” would make Michael Corleone the popular avatar of an ab-
stract refusal to traffic in the sentimental but to become a mandarin “power
of blackness” on his own, to abscond to a tower of his own creation, to
deny a common humanity within the murderous family. Such would be
an elite critical reading of Michael’s passage with the potential result of
making him a metacritical brooder over his inhabited mob narrative.
However, Puzo gives scant evidence that such was his intention at all,
and such a critical stance would tell us very little about the narrative’s
hold on its audience in American culture.
       A more useful critical approach would be to attempt a full-field
description of the various acts of Puzo and his Corleone family coordi-
nated with readerly and critical acts. What might be the congress among
these subjects? Everything about the family is concealed on the surface
from America, yet nothing is concealed in Puzo’s writing. The writing
holds no secrets, yet the family business is an invisible empire. Within
the “Popular Subversive” then would be a series of guilty pleasures that
take dead aim at the taste culture and the hegemony of aesthetics, each
transgression predicated on the necessity of an action that could be de-
scribed as “going bad,” which would include:

     • Vito and Michael Corleone becoming murderers (Going Bad=
       Becoming the Godfather)
     • Mario Puzo writing the novel (Going Bad=Writing The Godfather)
     • Readership (Going Bad=Reading and Liking The Godfather)
     • Critical Act (Going Bad=Writing on The Godfather).

      In each case, “disinterest” and the “beautiful” are canceled. In the
society in which he finds himself in New York around 1920, Vito Corleone
cannot see a way to rise in the world. His first obstacle to autonomy and
security is the “Black Hand” extortionist, Don Fanucci. Vito Corleone would
establish himself as a “made man,” something created or produced be-
yond natural law, a killer to be feared when he comes speaking reason in
a soft voice. It will be in your best interest to hear his practical maxims and,
upon reflection, to do his bidding. Puzo tries to “escape” his ethnicity in
                               Popular Fiction                              33



World War II and during the first years of his writing career. When he
writes The Fortunate Pilgrim to critical acclaim but little popular success, he
says he feels betrayed and thus knows what he must do: “write below his
gifts” in the next novel, which, in chronicling the descent into and growth
of a great crime empire, is paralleled in the writing change from The For-
tunate Pilgrim to The Godfather in characterization, tone, and complexity.
Going bad is going away from the moral norms, the taste culture, ethnic
realism, and the standards of critical judgment.
       The Godfather counters all the authorities that function like the invis-
ible government of literary culture to keep Puzo from validating his
“belief in art” as a talisman to ward off any life-world interference. Puzo
goes outside the debate to find his godfather. The Corleone historical
situation is such that the “Family” replaces “Art” as the first principle,
even as The Godfather replaces Puzo’s earlier fiction. Puzo believes in Don
Corleone as he had in art; he finds in him the protection that he could
“find in no other place” (The Godfather Papers 34). The Godfather is Puzo’s
revision of the power of art to the popular realm where he as author
cannot be touched by criticism and because of success.
       The innocent or naive transgression in this Popular Subversive se-
ries would be that of the popular reader who is consuming the product
according to the dictates of the author and can’t put the book down or
goes to see the films repeatedly. For that audience, “liking” The Godfather
would include approving of the actions that the Corleones must take
outside the law on behalf of the sanctioned family and its survival or
simply not taking heed of the issues at all. For the critic going bad, the
analysis of a popular work involves many issues that make The Godfather
compelling. They include the critical positing of a metaphorical-
hypothetical relation of author to work, author to character, and author
to vocation that must be mediated not only by aesthetics (ironically con-
ceived as the refuge from which Puzo decamps) but also by issues of the
critic’s choice of subject to study (popular fiction), author (a best-selling
author), issues (morality of the text, ethical norms, taking form “seri-
ously” in Puzo’s text, history, elite and popular literary relations). Each
of these choices, too, suggests a crisis of “belief” on the part of the critic,
allowing that it might be outside traditional literary study that he might
find the most interesting issues of fiction’s rationale and praxis. To ana-
lyze The Godfather is to become something of a metaphorical Corleone
family member, seeing from cosa nostra (reconfigured as popular fiction)
just what that outside world of elite fiction and criticism looks like from
different discriminations and considerations within popular fiction.3 Once
uneasily situated, the popular fiction critic is constantly adjusting what
Smith in Contingencies of Value calls “prejudices” in the best sense (“as-
sumptions, expectations, capacities”) that determine critical “identity”
during an informed reading (10). And then, having been sucked back in
34                               Chapter 1



(to reverse Michael’s intimation in Godfather III), how do I find my way
back out, and why would I wish to do so? Within the Popular Sub-
versive, every player becomes something of an outlaw, fostering a
new identity.


  Reading The Godfather : Liberal Pluralist Training
        and Praxis in the Bourgeois Sphere

       Working against the traditional anathematization of the popular,
the critic who wishes to confront it faces a complicated task. The two
most prominent Anglo-American contemporary schools of criticism of
the popular can generally be placed under the headings of the American
popular culture movement and the British cultural studies group. These
movements have been poles apart in genesis and influences. The Ameri-
can popular culture movement dates from the early 1970s and is an
outgrowth of both the American studies content and artifact-based school
of analysis and a more media-wise component comprising the study of,
in addition to popular fiction, advertising, television, music, and video.
The American study has been egalitarian and generally not theoretically
based and has shown itself to be descriptive rather than analytical with
an antipathy toward evaluation and moral judgment. The British Cul-
tural Studies movement is largely rooted in a Marxist theoretical base
that studies all aspects of media culture as revealing multiple false
consciousnesses in a variety of rhetorics. The British critics tend to void
or replace the content of the popular texts with their suggestive absences,
to read affirmative narratives as documents of a hegemonic culture that
practices its obfuscations and dominations through the culture industry.
The godfathers of such a critical program would undoubtedly include
Antonio Gramsci, Louis Althusser, and Raymond Williams, along with
the austere works of Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno. The Cul-
tural Studies movement’s critical rhetoric routinely contains implicit moral
criticism of the contemporary culture that spawns the popular works.
       Along with these critical movements in popular culture study, the
criticism of popular fiction has been enhanced by the major speculations
on reader response across a range of imaginings from class-based readers
to psychoanalytic studies of how we read and for what formations and
to gender and race-based reading in the “multiples” that comprise the
makeup of the contemporary reading audience. Critics from the more
tropological Chicago school of the critical formalist tradition, who branch
off from New Criticism toward Kenneth Burke but still honor the text for
what it can yield to the responding reader, present a hybrid critical ap-
proach. One of the most interesting has been Peter Rabinowitz in Before
Reading (1987). A critic trained by Wayne Booth to read for irony and
figural density, Rabinowitz extends that skill into a set of reading precon-
                                Popular Fiction                              35



ceptions held by readers from varying classes of training and profes-
sional interest. Rabinowitz is also influenced by the strong and continu-
ing meditations on interpretive communities by writers such as Stanley
Fish and aims to understand, as carefully as possible, the ways in which
we model an array of preconceptions about a fictional text prior to the
act of assembling our judgments when we read the fiction.
      One of Rabinowitz’s opening observations is that the academy, site
of reader training for the American professionalized middle class, will
always value complexity over “more formulaic” literature, and, there-
fore, critics will only find the “formulaic” amidst the noncanonical texts.
To drive critics out to the formulaic without any map back to the main
line of elite literary criticism, to segregate elite from popular fiction in all
critical discourse is to inherently develop a rigid canonical economy, one
that in the past few decades has been greatly challenged and one for
which conservative critics mourn as they conceive of the decline in “read-
ing standards” and choice of texts during the culture wars. Rabinowitz’s
good sense yields a maxim that I fully endorse in this book: “It is impos-
sible to examine the mechanism of literary evaluation itself without study-
ing both texts that are highly regarded by our literary judges and texts
that are generally deemed inferior” (11). If The Godfather is to have the
range of reference that I hope it to have, I must demonstrate its relevance
on a number of fronts, to establish and sustain a dialogue with other
popular texts as well as with elite fiction, with other historical periods in
American fiction, with major formations in our history such as immigra-
tion and the constructed “melting pot” in their relation to the strong
American figures of family and business. I want to establish that The
Godfather’s nightmares belong to a national psyche consistently captured
by popular fiction but not often touched deeply by literary-critical de-
bates over canonicity and one that rumbles on beneath the critical and
academic wars fought about interpretation. Thus I want to historicize
Rabinowitz’s formalist rules for reading in order to drive down deeper
into America’s story in mythic and historical imagining.
      In his section on “Popular Fiction as a Genre,” Rabinowitz exam-
ines at some length the problems and contradictions of an ironic mode
of interpretation. He knows that when, for example, we find inconsisten-
cies in elite texts, we read them as intentionally crafted or at least coher-
ent in their complexity, but when we find inconsistencies in popular
texts, we ignore them or read them as flaws (188). Certainly the popular
readership reads for the plot, according to the writer’s intent to fill the
signifier. The trained critic will indeed arrest the text at any point he
chooses to intervene in the author’s sequence with a reified excerpt that
takes on a life of its own as the critic’s purloined text, which he then
covers with a meaning. Rabinowitz contends that a “basic rule of coher-
ence” in popular literature is that the “ironic reading . . . whatever its
textual grounding, would be wrong as an interpretation of the author’s
36                               Chapter 1



intentions” (190), adding that it’s conceivable that popular and elite read-
ing strategies are “not mutually exclusive,” although he suspects “only
academics would actually read” a novel in this fashion. Yet it’s clear that
when an “academic” reads The Godfather, he does so with many of the
same conflicts and social conditioning as that of a so-called popular reader.
He’s subject to the same field imaginary of American values and notions
of “family” and “business.” The academic reader is different in kind
rather than degree, as Bourdieu would tell us.
      Rabinowitz is most concerned with the ultimate goal of achieving
the right or best reading and one that is a single critical act by a trained
professional. With a novel of such wide cultural dissemination as The
Godfather, into so many different areas of national life, it’s difficult to
know what a “right” reading of it might be. If I acknowledge the fact that
I know the rules of the elite critical game, I believe I can and should read
against what I deem to be authorial intent for a number of reasons.
Rabinowitz suggests that this wouldn’t be playing fair, a lingering bias
that comes closer to that of Booth and perhaps E. D. Hirsch. I freely
admit The Godfather fractures my reading responses into conflicting feel-
ings and several judgments, which I continually want to place in an
“interested” rather than “disinterested” posture. I read the novel as an
American male academic of a certain age and training who believes the
comprehension of The Godfather is a very complex matter, which reaches
deep into the history of American fiction and American configuration of
the national errand and family. Although Rabinowitz states that “for any
actual act of reading, we must choose one genre or the other” (193), the
“actual act” must be qualified in criticism, often line-by-line and chapter-
by-chapter as texts and characters contradict themselves.
      Such contradictions are apparent all through The Godfather and never
more prominent than in the Corleones’ violent acts in the name of reason
and family. Surely a character such as Michael Corleone, his face frac-
tured by Captain McCluskey’s blow outside the hospital, his life simi-
larly fractured among Sicilian/American, war hero, Ivy League college
boy and family avenger lives overtly under the sign of physical double-
ness for much of the novel. The reader lives with Michael’s hybridity all
the time; he’s the ultimate outsider (brooding, isolated, half-assimilated)
who also becomes the ultimate insider, the son, the heir from whom all
power will flow. We may not always be comfortable when Puzo invokes
“Michael the killer” over “Michael the good son” or feel Puzo has art-
fully and meaningfully transitioned between them, but all readers, not
just critical academic ones, are capable of grasping the contradictions of
The Godfather’s discourse. We are asked to accept non-assimilation over
the putative melting pot story, where our strong feelings are enlisted on
the side of the “good” murderers as they battle the “bad” murderers.
Such reading agility is not simply a critic’s construct; it’s required of all
                               Popular Fiction                            37



Godfather readers to suppress parts of a reading self at the expense of
others, to lose, for a while, a liberal pluralist view or a First World
nonethnic view, to submit to the novel’s way with us. I no longer know
how to get to the point of a “right” reading without severe commentary
on the intent of such a reading. I’m often constructing “a” reading to
show a specific facet of The Godfather’s range or authority within a critical
ensemble, which might be defined as multiculturalism at its most inclu-
sive at the critical level, not quite a melting pot but capable of a real
suppleness. The Aristotelian urge to find The Godfather’s proper cubby-
hole and file it is what I want to resist in order to demonstrate that a
novel of wide cultural acceptance as an instinctive “read” can be as in-
teresting to write about as a novel of intellectual depth. To learn how to
write on this phenomeon is to write a book on Puzo and The Godfather.
       Part of that learning involves a nontheoretical attempt to face
squarely my own reading temperament, insofar as I can, to know the
fundamental predispositions and academic credentials that shape me as
a liberal, pluralist, secular reader. My deep background through all plu-
ralistic misgivings about The Godfather’s hermeticism and conservative
family isolation most likely springs from the ideals of the Enlightenment
as articulated through a massive descriptive program of Western culture.
The pluralist themes of what Richard Bernstein calls an “engaged fallible
liberalism” include antifoundationalism, fallibilism, the social character
of the self, contingency, and the regulative idea of a critical community
(387–88). In their fierce identity, the Corleones believe themselves to be
the foundation of any order. They are infallible and antisocial; they refuse
to recognize that any outside community regulates their conduct or lives;
and they guard against contingency, feeling it an insult to their control.
It’s clear from reading The Godfather and other documents that the En-
lightenment appears to have missed Sicily.
       Jurgen Habermas in the past several decades has defined the “bour-
geois public sphere,” a culture’s common life that is defined and debated
through a broadly conceived dialogue that buttresses and modulates legal,
political, and economic institutions and their policies. A Corleone or
Soprano will always disparage such a culture that they reduce to the “big
shots” or the “Carnegies and Rockefellers” as Tony Soprano says, or the
pezzonovantis and .90 calibers of The Godfather, while Michael abstracts the
society he might someday join as “some country club crowd, the good
simple life of well-to-do Americans” (363). Liberal theorists believe they
move in a sphere elevated beyond such suspicion and cliché voiced by
the ethnic outsiders. Theories of civil society value a shared code of
human conduct and transaction beyond the family or clan and refer back
to founding documents that authorize the American and French revolu-
tions of the common man as well, such as Rousseau’s “Social Contract”
(1762), in which he wrote, “Each of us puts his person and all his power
38                                Chapter 1



in common under the supreme direction of the general will, and in our
corporate capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible part of the
whole” (Miller 220). Here is a partial but crucial beginning of the Enlight-
enment road to both freedom and justice, says Habermas (Trey 24). John
Gray has recently commented that the Enlightenment in America has
achieved “the status of a civil religion,” and he quotes Richard Rorty in
his belief that America gives “democracy priority over philosophy” and
that humanism puts “power in the service of love” held together “by
nothing less fragile than social hope” (144, 170–71).
      John Kekes flatly states that pluralism is a moral theory (12) and
one that enlarges our view of justice. He also quotes Michael Sandel to
the effect that “society being composed of a plurality of persons . . . is
best arranged when it is governed by principles that do not themselves
presuppose any particular conception of the good. . . . This is the liberal-
ism of Kant” (200). Thus does disinterest as a harbinger of taste wind its
way back into moral imagining. Such cultural armature and consensus
from the bourgeois life world helps comprise the assumptions in Ameri-
can society that live within the reader who also turns pages of The God-
father to revel in the Corleones’ sensational and bloody triumphs. This
multifaceted reader of prejudices, allegiances, and conditioning is always
potentially alive to the contradictions in Puzo’s text. John Guillory in
Cultural Capital defines several of these liberal assumptions, such as “com-
peting interest groups,” “balance of societal demands,” “democratic civic
culture,” and “political participation and trust” (4). If I read The Godfather
in the American society in which the Corleones move, I find most of
pluralism’s precepts to be antithetical to the ethics and world view of
the Corleones.
      Pluralism is built into liberalism “as it were on the ground floor”
(Kekes 201). Pluralism appears as a more static theory of the tolerance of
differences, while liberal influence would animate that tolerance toward
a desirable end that liberalism could articulate in a social sphere. A short
list of the resulting adversarial positions on major issues might be
as follows:

     1. Good and Evil

     • Corleones: The nature of good and evil is universal and natural.
       Evil is lodged in authority or the state and must be opposed to get
       justice. The state is always inimical to its citizens [what might be
       called the “Sicilian world view” according to Puzo].
     • Liberal Pluralist Reader (Me): Evil is socially and culturally based
       and can be, should be opposed in service of justice. Evil is not
       inherently coextensive with the state or with any satanic indi-
       vidual or ethnic group; it is not identified. Evil is, in fact, a hyper-
       bolic embarrassment in sacred/profane rhetoric.
                         Popular Fiction                             39



2. Business

• Corleones: The business of making money takes primacy. Noth-
  ing should be allowed to get in its way.

• Liberal Pluralist: Business is business but rapacious if unchecked
  since competing groups go out of balance. The Mob is its perfect
  lawless example, limiting freedom and assaulting human rights.

3. Ethnic Solidarity and Family

• Corleones: Ethnic identity and family unity are the only stays against
  disaster in America. The “common good” is a naive fantasy.

• Liberal Pluralist: Ethnic family identity is admirable but can and
  should be converted to a wider, shared Americanism that dis-
  solves “hyphenated” identities when the “common good” is
  at stake.

4. Communication

• Corleones: Old World gestural forms (bella figura) constitute pow-
  erful weapons against the bareness of language not marked
  by identity.

• Liberal Pluralist: Old World gestural forms are quaint, melo-
  dramatic, and immature but should be nominally honored
  for their authenticity.

5. Destiny

• Corleones: Resignation to individual destiny is inevitable. Class
  and ethnic identity are destiny.

• Liberal Pluralist: Resignation to destiny is superstitious and fa-
  talistic, unless it is couched in American collective terms of “Mani-
  fest Destiny.”

6. Individual Responsibility
• Corleones: Belief in individual responsibility extends only to your-
  self and your identified and extended family.
• Liberal Pluralist: Belief in individual responsibility must be vi-
  sionary and extend to everyone, for the health of the collective
  society depends on such duties taken seriously.
40                               Chapter 1



     7. Women
     • Corleones: Women must be kept out of the family business; yet
       women and children provide the moral rationale for any action
       the men may take in the name of family.
     • Liberal Pluralist: Women should have equal opportunity to rights
       and privileges in society and should control their decisions about
       marriage and reproduction.

     8. Death
     • Corleones: “What can we do about death?” It comes to all people.
     • Liberal Pluralist: “What can we do about death?” We have a social
       imperative to bring all people under the rule of law and work to
       eradicate hunger, disease, and poverty.

       Not only do these opposed positions cohere “before reading,” they
also are extrinsic or beyond reading, as germane to reading a text as
voting a party ticket, building a career, or constructing an emotional life.
The liberal pluralist ethic is one of advocacy over resignation. Such a
view descends in part from John Dewey’s pragmatism at the turn of the
twentieth century to the contemporary views of Rorty, essentially the
capitalist version of “what is to be done?” in an engaged left pluralism.
Rorty would call the human rights culture a positive outcome of a sen-
timental education (172). Rorty’s squarely in the party of Hume: we train
our feelings through texts such as Uncle Tom’s Cabin, but, as Rorty knows,
“sentimental education works only on people who can relax long enough
to listen” (180); it becomes a class argument of whether the Corleones or
any ethnic or historically or economically oppressed group can afford to
move out from identity to a more universal humanism. This humanism
possesses a view of agency and freedom, nurtured carefully through an
American society that has developed along a line of sympathetic political
development.4 The liberal pluralist feels his communitarian ethic to be as
natural, as “humanist,” as Don Corleone feels his family-based business
and Old World identitarian view to be. The temperamental shift in read-
ing comes when the liberal pluralist reader, who, after all, is in some
form of identity in his pluralism, can pull back to the intolerance of the
one identity of the Corleones, turn off the hallowed differences of plural-
ism, and vote “Corleone” all the way. This reader can indeed also be-
come part of an “Old World” imaginary, can take both the persecution of
the peasant Corleones and the absolute baronial power of the dominant
Corleones and negotiate a readerly way through a modern America in a
tolerant fantasy of both power and freedom where the Corleones truly
become “Our Gang.”
                               Popular Fiction                             41



       Such a reader experiences both revulsion and exhilaration when
drawn into the Corleone world, one capable of altering or suspending
many beliefs. The Godfather and, by extension, popular fiction, licenses
a terrific mobility and freedom. To live through a Don Corleone allows
a reader to know both an avenging peasant and the wielder of enor-
mous personal patriarchal power within a criminal empire and a man
who goes home at night to an American family. Here is the freedom of
popular fiction, which posits a fanciful crossing of generic lines in an
imagined mobile society. In Gone with the Wind, Scarlett O’Hara is plan-
tation ingenue, an Atlanta businesswoman and a suffering romantic
heroine. In Judith Krantz’s Princess Daisy, Daisy is a white Russian
princess, a New York career woman, an incestuous rape victim—and a
suffering romantic heroine. Within the elusive and cliché-ridden Ameri-
can Dream is the geography of The Godfather itself: that, in America, one
can move outward in total freedom to follow an individual destiny, yet
return to a rooted identity (the Family, Tara, Princess-hood). A Corleone
can take the law into his own hands, transgress any bond with society
in the name of family and its security. Here is the extremity of the
“Freedom To,” the radical sanction in a material and liberal culture
acted out in a natural abundance where “making self” is a male iden-
tity kit, as American heroes from Huck to Gatsby to Holden to Michael
Corleone have known.
       In this vein, the liberal pluralist society appears paralyzed by toler-
ance, forms, and consensus in comparison with the the latent fury of Old
World fatalism, which suddenly in paroxysms of violence can vanquish
its foes like a slumbering beast awakening to feed. The liberal society
with its balances, flexibility, and trust becomes the democratic, civic enemy
for the Corleones to overcome or pay off as complicitous ally. Any critic
of American popular fiction is writing from the political freedom of the
liberal culture that sanctions the taste culture to operate in its restricted
sphere of capital. As Puzo’s characters know, it’s the very tolerance of the
American civic and judicial structures that allows their dreams to flour-
ish. It’s the very agreement by the pluralist culture that their differences
are OK, indeed hallowed in principle. Thus the moral question of What
if everyone acted this way? encircles everyone who has agreed to play by
the rules as long as they are individual successes. This question comes to
be the great challenge to the “ethic” of the Godfather himself. In the
semantic domain of literary criticism, the question posed by the critic
from the precincts of the taste culture is “what moral questions can be
asked in and of popular fiction?” It’s the critic’s task to move through the
thicket of prohibitions of (a) asking moral questions and (b) asking them
of a popular text, to find the implications and connections between aes-
thetics and these questions. In Kant’s terms, such would be to find ways
to link the pleasure and displeasure we call “taste,” as defined through our
labeling the beautiful and the sublime, with the pleasure and displeasure
42                                Chapter 1



we call “moral feeling” that always is enlisted when we are “judging for
an interest.”
     Hume in “Of a Standard of Taste” in particular was very clear on
what we ought to do with characters such as the Corleones when we
encounter them in literature:

     But where the ideas of morality and decency alter from one
     age to another, and where vicious manners are described,
     without being marked with the proper characters of blame
     and disapprobation, they must be allowed to [i.e., we must
     agree that they] disfigure the poem, and to be a real deformity.
     I cannot, nor is it proper I should, enter into such sentiments,
     and however I may excuse the poet, on account of the man-
     ners of his age, I can never relish the composition. (315)

Hume practices moral criticism here after clearly stating that if the poet
has not the proper awe and horror before the “vicious” scenes he imag-
ines, then Hume will not accept the narrative as true or important. Thus,
Hume would not want to identify with a Sicilian brigand or American
robber baron if Puzo was not interested in tallying up the moral balance
sheet in the fiction. Calling up these moral imperatives places Hume
provisionally outside the “vicious manners” (of a mob family) in a privi-
leged place, akin to that of aesthetics but actually informed almost exclu-
sively by sentiments. Such personal and historically based reader
projections usually occur within characteristic moves of trained readers
and many different responses might influence our continuing struggles
to link the aesthetic reading to the moral reading. A text such as The
Godfather grounds our yearning signifieds and dreams in a life world of
action and character choice. Hume in A Treatise of Human Nature has a
reflection on our reflections on vice and virtue that takes as its example
“wilful murder”; it states “the vice entirely escapes you as long as you
consider the object” (468–69). Hume then changes the focus as he
subjectifies the response to the “vice”: “You never can find it, till you
turn your reflexion into your own breast, and find a sentiment of disap-
probation which arises in you toward the action. Here is a matter of fact:
but ’tis the object of feeling, not of reason. It lies in yourself, not in the
object. . . . Vice and virtue, therefore, may be compar’d to sounds, colors,
heat and cold” (Treatise 468–69). Hume’s view is that human motives are
the only proper object of moral judgments and that actions undertaken
on behalf of these motives are what we may judge.
      In an altogether serendipitous way, Hume provides a structure
whereby feeling is corrected by reason (Shaw 34). In The Godfather, mur-
ders are carried out within a structure of planning and justification that
constitutes not only a Corleone apologia but something akin to a brief
for the oppressed and powerless. The Corleones practice their own utili-
                               Popular Fiction                             43



tarianism, reasoning their way to why a Fanucci must die, a McCluskey,
a Paulie Gatto. At each point the murder carried out is reasonable and
justified as necessary for the family’s survival and prosperity.5 When I
make a moral judgment against such predation, I consider the Corleone
rhetoric, their means/ends arguments, and their array of justifications.
Within this consideration, I’m also writing a microcosmic abstract of
my own liberal pluralist view, of my sense of the law and the social
contract. These allegiances are in play prior to my aesthetic appraisal or
my formalist interest, but they work to shape my critical operations, as
Bourdieu knows. Reader-critics of The Godfather continually find them-
selves in the dynamic of moving back and forth in judgment amidst The
Godfather’s signifieds: the family is compelling; the family is contempt-
ible. Its solidarity is thrilling; its solidarity is hermetic and un-American.
Terrific set-piece scenes in The Godfather are powerful and revealing on
enormous questions of good versus evil, nature versus history, and
myth versus fiction, but their logic is often rudimentary and morally
chaotic. If I want to show Puzo prematurely affirming a universal sig-
nified in face of a strong historical or moral contradiction, I appraise a
site where I demonstrate that the aesthetics of the scene dictates the
fictional meaning through a mystification. The morality of the scene (its
“message”) is discussed through the morality of the fictional rhetoric
(see chapter 5).
       Booth in The Company We Keep (1988) writes of the disparate ways
a text “deepened my experience, heightened my sensibilities, matured
my judgement, consoled me, shocked me” (52). Such is a formidable list
of emotional, civic, and sensational pleasures, pluralist to be sure. Yet
what if The Godfather “deepened my experience” in dealing with and
through popular fiction, if my experience was not necessarily some vari-
ant of cultural enlightenment but experience in writing on this structural
form? Reading The Godfather then becomes my experiment in which I
may shape the results. If I do not respect the text’s conclusions and probe
for the problem in authorial intent, some rough handling may be in
order; an achieved moral reading must rise from the ruins of The Godfa-
ther. My “judgment” can “mature” only after I’ve taken The Godfather not
as far as I can, the critic’s normal Promethean impulse, but after I keep
asking the text to formulate more cogent questions and choices for its
characters and situations. Such is the inevitable critical and academic
conversion of even plot-driven, goal-oriented action texts such as The
Godfather to reflective ends. As Booth rather censoriously knows, we may
ask the author in a moralistic moment, “Why have you failed in your
inherent responsibility to give us, your readers, the ethical support we
need?” (125). Booth goes on to cite Sartre in What Is Literature that the
author demand more of the reader, that for Sartre, the ethical, ideologi-
cal, and political judgments are made when we gauge “how well the
fiction serves the reader’s freedom” (127), a phrase that when unpacked
44                               Chapter 1



might suffice for a modernist and existential credo on critical reading
with freedom as the liberal pluralist end to be served.6
      A more consistent postmodern view is to let all terminology coexist
in a more relaxed tension where the inability to sharply distinguish
popular from elite, moral from aesthetic might count as a creative first
step. Elite and popular literature both evade the social, political, moral,
and ethical. Elite literature drives the heroic figure upward into the tower
where he becomes the heroic artist. Popular literature inflates the heroic
figure into a man of mythic proportions. In each case, the ground of the
fiction where moral and ethical choices are to be made in society is can-
celed out, and fictional realism is no road home. Stephen Dedalus may
awake from the nightmare of history by a rhetorical epiphany. Vito and
Michael Corleone leave history behind and become gods in a parallel
universe to America; they awaken to opportunity. In the case of both elite
and popular fiction, the deep need is for control of the text and the life,
a freedom not reinvested in the pluralism that recognizes society and
other people. The bourgeois flees to become an artist, the immigrant flees
oppression as well to become “author of his destiny,” a capitalist stand-
in for a creator, an author, a god. Don Corleone will make himself up as
surely as Stephen Dedalus. What logically follows in dealing with Puzo
and The Godfather is that if an author inscribes God in the very title, we
as reader critics from a more prosaic universe are surely within our rights
to mark well Puzo’s appropriations in his/His name.


     Jameson: Simultaneity and Reading the Popular

      At its best, America in its ideals and the promises of its institutions
may be so much more than the bleak Corleone vision of it. However, the
Corleones may operate as rapaciously as the economic system itself and
may, indeed, exemplify it. How does the reader process both the promise
and the predation of the Corleones? Certainly Fredric Jameson in his
commentary on The Godfather suggests that its true displaced or uncon-
scious story is nothing less than the substitution of the myth of the Mafia
for American business itself, the humming engine of late industrial capi-
talism (“Reification” 32). Jameson believes that the substitution of the
figure of “Crime” for “Business” deflects criticism of The Godfather to-
ward a moral and ethical criticism that doesn’t really penetrate to its
economic subject. He asks that if the obfuscation of Business as Crime is
the “ideological” function of The Godfather narrative, then what is its
Utopian function? He finds that function to be the Family itself as a site
of envy and longing for a solidarity over and against radical instabilities
in a capitalist system. These twin functions of ideological critique and
Utopian longing are fundamental to all Jamesonian study of popular
                               Popular Fiction                             45



forms and comprise the fullest response to thinking through the field of
fictional meanings that a critical reader confronts in The Godfather.
      Within Jameson’s body of work is a strong yearning for a re-created
wholeness of being. His is a powerful romantic sensibility shackled to a
set of terrible truths about the forces that move human society. It’s not
only that he continually addresses ideological function and Utopian fantasy
but that he consistently modifies these terms with urgent and desperate as
modifiers, respectively. Jameson’s critique of popular forms is charged
and tense; he states that The Godfather activates “our deepest fantasies
about the nature of social life” (34). Jameson sounds quite Humean in his
reaching out to the widest possible sense of “rightness” that we can
command and ask of ourselves as we read. The Godfather tells us not only
about our society “as we live it now” but as we feel “in our bones” we
ought to live it (34), a remarkably precritical and instinctual statement
from a contemporary critic whose fascination with the popular has been
conveyed through an austerity and rigor of critical formulation but who
remains a passionate, primitive sensibility in relation to what he calls in
The Political Unconscious (1981) the pull of “magical narratives.”
      Jameson believes the reader’s task is, as in a fairy tale, “to reawaken
in the midst of a privatizing and psychologizing society” to what a text
can truly mean to us, to be critically aware of all the various obfuscations
and elisions that a naive capitalist text might offer but to remain en-
chanted and enthralled, to mount a rhetorical unmasking in the service
of a Utopian goal of reaching signifieds of promise: justice, tolerance,
wholeness. Jameson cannot renounce an ethical quest even as he de-
nounces ethicism as a premature complacency while he works “toward
the light” while “falling into history” (33). For him, the critical act itself
recapitulates biblical trajectory, for it is undertaken in the sadness of a
fallen world amidst texts that wander and can never see the whole truth,
that in some Hegelian riddle are always doomed to be sundered from
themselves as they locally re-create the truths of the master narratives.7
In the conceptual chaos and enormous signification of The Godfather, one
can find critical melodramas aplenty transmuted into the actions of the
Corleones. Jameson wants to retain a common subject and society, which
is why he still respects the great realistic novels of the nineteenth century.
Jameson is enormously inclusive, arguing that a popular narrative can
account for everything if its surface meanings, psychic underside, and
cultural significance are taken into account. Don Corleone would try to
account for everything in the life of his family. No powerful event that
happens in his world goes unnoticed or uncaused. He warns the other
crime families that he will take it personally even if a bolt of lightning
should strike Michael on his return from Sicily (293–94). The Corleones
themselves “read” the totality that is America and extrapolate only what
they need and try to control the rest. They are continually attempting to,
46                               Chapter 1



in the classic Marxist formulation, “wrest a realm of Freedom from a
realm of Necessity” (The Political Unconscious 19) but their localized self-
mystification of this urgency is to accrue enough money, power, and
influence through coercion and murder masked as reason to join that
“general American family,” a hollow yearning that commits them to an
ever-darker and Sisyphean task, sundered from themselves.
       In the rhetorically dramatic conclusion to The Political Unconscious,
Jameson outlines a critical program for a popular literature study that
would acknowledge all the potential power in the popular form as well
as its potential abuse in false consciousness. He states, “If the ideological
function of mass culture is understood as a process whereby otherwise
dangerous and protopolitical impulses are ‘managed’ and defused, re-
channeled and offered spurious objects, then some preliminary step must
also be theorized in which these same impulses—the raw material upon
which the process works—are initially awakened within the very text
that seeks to still them” (287). In The Godfather, crime, violence, and nar-
row ethnicity are rechanneled and shown to produce unimaginable
American wealth and power within the very text of the family itself, which
The Godfather asks us to read as both the ground and reason any action
is sanctioned. Within a false consciousness, the family provides The God-
father with “a reaffirmation of this or that legitimizing strategy” (287). A
key concept for Jameson in his commitment to the dialectic is “simulta-
neity,” the ability to think through all the contradictions of a text’s pro-
duction and reception at one and the same moment, to hold all findings
in a true suspension, to never let the critical voice lapse into moralizing
or ethical commentary without shoring up the opposite side of the argu-
ment. A criticism of the extended Godfather narrative must respect that
simultaneous attraction and repulsion and must live the extreme contra-
dictions of the Family. The Godfather at one and the same time describes
the absolute power of the family to signify nurture, justice, and security,
while at the same time the text displaces “family” to an extended ob-
scene business entity. The family business is “protection”; the family
business is “murder.” The family business is an extreme example of eth-
nic identity; the Corleone desire to be legitimate, to “join” America, is in
lip service to pluralism’s wholeness and future promise.
       Jameson often aims a backhanded blow at the traces of an ethical
criticism in lines such as “Only an ethical politics, linked to those ethical
categories we have often had occasion to criticize . . . will need to ‘prove’
that one of these forms of class consciousness is good or positive and the
other reprehensible or wicked” (290). He prefers the imprint of the ethi-
cal and affirmative as long as it is in the deferred “hard saying” of a
criticism that both humanizes Marxism and decries the facility of tradi-
tional humanism, that can bear the Utopian when it is seen to be an
imaginative desperation and a necessity. Every popular novel yields up
some part of this internal dynamic without theorizing it, eliding the
                              Popular Fiction                           47



negative hermeneutic of power and authority in the “going bad” or
“vengeance” narrative that is made bearable by the positive signifieds
that are called up in the name of “family,” “country” or “survival.” Two
distinct moments of false consciousness may be identified. The first is a
premature optimism and affirmation of a transcendental signified on the
part of the reader (the “life is beautiful” syndrome uttered by Don
Corleone at his death or by Roberto Benigni to a bemused and morally
stunned Hollywood in 1999). The second moment of false consciousness
is through a description of some precapitalist structure, either historical
(feudal) or literary (epic) as the actual face of a modern social structure
(business or the Family) or a literary form (the popular novel). This af-
firmation and description comprise the face of the popular narrative and
the viewpoint of its implied author.
       Jameson is confident that such simultaneous readings will tran-
scend what we know as literary or even cultural criticism with an un-
ceasing dialogue between the ideological and the Utopian, the
instrumental and the communal reading of culture, and will be able to
wed a functional method to an “anticipatory” one (296). Such a program
yields the widest scope for reading popular fiction. A literary criticism
that cannot grasp the Utopian appeal of best sellers can scarcely then
appropriate their narrative energies and must doom itself to an elitist
whining. In the succeeding chapters, I will stress that The Godfather is
both a truth and a lie, its family the most rooted of American signifieds
in ethnic identity and yet the most unstable compound of nurture, vio-
lence, and illegitimacy. The consequences of that doubleness in significa-
tion are what a multiple criticism of The Godfather is all about. What does
it mean in our time to read this novel so redolent of past oppression and
future promise, a novel that is visceral and immediate in calling on our
readerly allegiances and American signifieds, a novel not well made but
surely important? Clarifying responses to The Godfather does not entail a
full-field theory or a final judgment of its power or worth but rather as
careful and complete a bringing-forth of all the ways in which this family
and this novel touch what is most vital to us in American culture through
a vehicle that we may wish better (whatever that may come to mean) but
that is never not powerful, compelling, full of precisely what engages our
taste at long last.


                             Conclusion

      In such varied acts of reading and criticism as I have posited in
chapter 1, we come closer to more utilitarian definitions of taste, such as
that of Bourdieu, who argues that taste is “the basis of the mutual adjust-
ment of all the features associated with a person” and that “the idea of
taste, typically bourgeois . . . presupposes absolute freedom of choice”
48                               Chapter 1



(Distinction 173, 177), in that taste is seemingly universal and without a
firm basis of comparison from person to person.8 Taste becomes the pow-
erful critical wild card that can always be played as something else.
Guillory believes in several stated equivalences that evaluation can al-
ways be called a judgment, that a theory of taste is the aesthetic itself,
and that the act of judgment is the assignment or recognition of cultural
capital, which is aesthetic value (306, 332), whereas Howard Caygill states
that Hume’s “Of the Standard of Taste” stipulated that “the standard of
taste is recognized to be indeterminate: it has neither the understanding’s
concern with the universal nor sentiment’s dispersal in particulars, yet
possesses characteristics of both” (77). This capacious and fluid defini-
tion opens a space for taste to play with the paradoxes inherent in the
continual movement from proof to emotional comprehension, from mo-
mentary apprehensions of truth in narrative balanced by questions about
the rhetoric of the form or the architecture of the disclosure. Such an
acknowledgment of the many bases of taste should not dictate that the
aesthetic valuing or devaluing of a text or partial text be an endless series
of occasions for metacritical inquiry on the valuation of making judg-
ments at all. Such way paralysis lies and the endless solipsism of sad
liberal misgivings. Rather the benefit of a book such as this one, I hope,
will be to use taste and the aesthetic not as absolutes but as the tradi-
tional yet contested categories from which to argue for and model the
criticism of popular texts and authors through focus on Puzo and
The Godfather.
      Pure taste in Kant’s critique is a “fundamental refusal of the facile”
(Bourdieu 486). Such is the power of that negation that no simple straight-
forward meaning of taste will ever be granted authority by critical method.
The taste culture will always be at odds with the popular, especially in
the sentimental and melodramatic narratives that comprise the form.
However, Hume’s more inclusive taste is an amalgam of sense and rea-
son, which sentiment dominates. Contemporary critics of intellect and
rhetorical power who are also moved by the social and historical rami-
fications of the literary act and the world thus illuminated are provoked
into affiliation with sentiment and at the same time pulled away from its
identification by instinctive mistrust. Jameson, Barthes, and Bourdieu and
their readers have all come to know too much and too well how subjec-
tive judgments are constructed and what violence we tend to do to our
best reading selves as we convict authors of premature affirmation or
false consciousness, in all the bad faith webs we can name but can never
truly step outside of in our writings. Such writers are all caught in con-
temporary criticism’s most sentimental motion: the oxymoronic, deeply
felt but austere refusal to take refuge and comfort in any particular cri-
tique but to believe passionately in the act itself. Barthes in Mythologies
speaks of the melancholy role of the “mythologist” who attempts to probe
language in popular culture. Barthes writes that “his speech is a
                              Popular Fiction                            49



metalanguage. . . . His task always remains ambiguous, hampered by its
ethical origin” (156). Such a critic who wishes to confront “a myth [that]
reaches the entire community . . . must become estranged if he wants to
liberate the myth.” Barthes creates a melodrama for the critic himself:
“He must live this assignment without any hope of going back . . .” (157).
Barthes’s language is most passionate and incendiary when he confronts
a paired linguistic and moral crisis, in this case, the critic living out an
assignment as a spy or double consciousness in a country or role not
conducive to bringing honor or joy to himself or to his readers. Such
estrangement in the service of a moral errand is easier to contemplate
heroically than to achieve in popular fiction criticism, where the critic
so often finds himself outside the family of heroes, villains, authors,
and readers.
      The Godfather has real power. The novel and films live in our dreams,
in our sense of origins and family as Americans, in our fantasies of social
power and control over our lives. However, The Godfather also squarely
asks us to choose a lawlessness that violates our shared democratic social
space and the norms agreed upon to guide civilized conduct in a free
society. When we choose to question Puzo, what sort of moral or ethical
readers do we become, and how do we then relate to our sensational,
sentimental, melodramatic reading selves? Such questions move past the
disinterestedness of the taste culture that lives in the ruse that it is not
part of an economy itself. The following chapters take The Godfather’s
pleasure and instruction seriously through both reason and feeling.
This page intentionally left blank.
                    chapter two


                Mario Puzo:
         An American Writer’s Career
I had been a true believer in art. I didn’t believe in religion or love or
women or men. I didn’t believe in society or philosophy. But I believed in art
for forty-five years. It gave me a comfort I found in no other place.
                                       —Puzo, “The Making of The Godfather”

Tried to write a trashy potboiler but had to give it up. Immoral and uninter-
esting, that’s why.
                        —Puzo, “Notes from an Unsuccessful Writer’s Diary”

I have written three novels. The Godfather is not as good as the preceding
two. I wrote it to make money.
                                       —Puzo, “The Making of The Godfather”

Finally, we must ask explicitly a question which is bound to be asked: what
is the degree of conscious strategy, cynical calculation, in the objective
strategies which observation brings to light and which ensure the correspon-
dence between positions and dispositions?
                                   —Bourdieu, The Field of Cultural Production

      With the publication of The Godfather in 1969, Mario Puzo became
the greatest multiethnic literary success in an American literary climate
that had only begun to register such seismic changes in its critical map-
ping. He, however, took little solace in that achievement.
      Puzo’s career pre- and post-Godfather is revealing, both for what he
writes and for what he doesn’t, for the insights his earlier and later novels
provide both on The Godfather but also on the writer himself as he struggles
for a readership and toward a self-examination. The greatest of all popular
immigrant sagas came from a failed elite author who had spent two

                                     51
52                               Chapter 2



decades avoiding Italian American subjects and refusing to chase a wide
readership. I believe this irony stunned Puzo, never far from a pervasive
and wary cynicism about human relations, to a series of revelations in
Fools Die (1978) that might explain his writer’s psyche to a public that had
placed him on a pedestal. Rather than freeing Puzo to become the sort of
writer he might want to be, one melancholy result of The Godfather’s ex-
traordinary popularity is that it made him rueful at his success; he could
not find ways to repeat a genre creation that he had never wanted to write
in the first place. The Godfather did not authorize Puzo to become a genre
industry himself such as a King, Clancy, or Rice.
       Puzo’s career is paradigmatic as he writes along the faultlines of
ethnic, mainstream, elite, and popular fiction in the post–World War II
era. I want to speculate on Puzo’s habitus or social-cultural milieu and
chart his hesitancies, gaps, and resentments, before and after his great
success. Never in American literary history had the imperative to write
the Great American Novel been so emblazoned on the horizon for a
generation as it had for the male writers coming home after World War
II. Puzo’s first novel, The Dark Arena (1955), is a Hemingwayesque-novel
of postwar Germany with tough guy veterans who could spring from In
Our Time. The Fortunate Pilgrim (1964) is his best novel by all measures
and comprises an excellent rendering of New York’s Lower West Side
Italian immigrant culture. The Godfather made Puzo a literary celebrity
while Coppola’s films largely superseded the novel’s achievement. Yet in
corners of The Godfather, Puzo questioned the very writer’s enterprise
that made his reputation. Puzo’s sequel to The Godfather is hardly what
might have been expected but rather the sprawling Fools Die, a novel
very knowing about literary success and its ironies. At last Puzo hypo-
thetically could be free of his author’s dreams and humiliations, having
“made his bones” with The Godfather. Fools Die’s hero is John Merlyn, a
novelist, an orphan rather than an ethnic hero, and a self-proclaimed
magician who is transfixed by gambling and knows fear and defeat
through a long, unnoticed writer’s career. Puzo evinced a great confusion
as a writer in a literary marketplace whose negotiations had remained an
economic and artistic riddle to him. Awash in money and novelistic capi-
tal after The Godfather, Puzo did not feel honored, nor could he honor the
writer in himself. Thus we can see how, prior to specific considerations
of The Godfather, Puzo’s overall vision of fiction and the novelist’s role
needs to be explored.


                    Puzo: Choosing a Dream

      Puzo’s success with The Godfather removed the suffering identity
that he had so carefully built up as a lonely outsider to his family, Italian
American culture, and the literary establishment. In many respects, the
                               Mario Puzo                               53



developing figure of Michael Corleone is Puzo himself at his grandest
and most morose. Michael is expelled into the larger American culture by
service in World War II; an Ivy Leaguer for a semester at Dartmouth, he
meets a New England daughter, Kay Adams. Michael is nonetheless
“sucked back in,” in Coppola/Puzo’s memorable phrase in Godfather III,
to salvage his family’s honor and his own, to save his father, and, ulti-
mately, to succeed him. He becomes Italian American with a vengeance.
Likewise, success as the author of The Godfather moved Puzo away from
his love affair with elite fiction. In many respects, writing about the
Mafia for Puzo was equivalent to joining the Mafia, to doing its business.
While such never occurred to Puzo on a fully conscious level in all his
years and writings, I want to speculate that the intricacies of “going bad”
on two levels (becoming the godfather instead of an “American Hero,”
writing The Godfather instead of an elite novel) are what compel Puzo to
write what is surely in Fools Die the strangest sequel to an American
popular classic.1 In Puzo’s case, escape and isolation, his great crutches
painfully erected over two decades of a writing life in America, were
always seductively calling him back from The Godfather’s pinnacle of
success. The slack profligacy of Fools Die is Puzo’s fictional summa on his
writing life.
      An earlier and even more curious text of clues than Fools Die exists
in which to search for Puzo’s views and writer’s discontents. A volume
of Puzoian miscellany entitled The Godfather Papers and Other Confessions
(1972) provides Puzo’s most detailed comments on his writing life. The
Godfather Papers, however, is not a collection that centers on the writing
of the novel or on the collaboration with Coppola on the screenplay for
the first film. Instead, these are book reviews, magazine essays, a short
story, pieces written and published between 1966 and 1968 for the most
part, during The Godfather’s composition. It’s the sort of slapped-together
book that a writer can expect to publish only when he’s “hot,” when all
his musings are seemingly relevant for a public that simply wants more.
The heart of the collection was three new pieces: “Choosing a Dream:
Italians in Hell’s Kitchen,” “The Making of The Godfather,” and “Notes
from an Unsuccessful Writer’s Diary.” Taken together, they form a pic-
ture of Puzo as ethnic subject/author and as a writer working through
a long and wounding love-hate affair with ethnicity and fiction, as well
as a malaise and discouragement at the moment of amazing success.
      Puzo was the son of parents who had both grown up on barren,
rocky, hillside farms outside Naples; he imagines that his direct ancestors
had been illiterate for a thousand years. After emigration, Puzo’s mother’s
first husband became a New York Central railroad laborer who died in
a docks accident, leaving a wife and four young children in the Italian
Lower West Side known as “Hell’s Kitchen.” Mario Puzo was born in
1920 after his mother remarried. His father (a “mystery,” a “Southern
Italian with blue eyes”) disappeared when Puzo was twelve, and Puzo
54                               Chapter 2



himself worked for the railroad from ages fifteen to twenty-one when he
joined the army after Pearl Harbor (24).
       Puzo’s use of this autobiographical Italian American material ini-
tially had been cautious and circuitous, not an unusual stance in modern
American fiction for an ethnic writer. In his first novel, The Dark Arena,
Walter Mosca can be intuited as Italian, but Puzo makes little of his
specific ethnic background, either in the book’s early New York family
scenes or in the bulk of the novel set in a defeated postwar Germany. The
Fortunate Pilgrim is Puzo’s radical turn to the Italian American subject
and a classic example of a second-generation ethnic novel rendered with
great fidelity and care. Such tacking between subjects in successive nov-
els earned Puzo in 1955 and 1964 good reviews and very little money or
readership. In the wake of The Godfather, Puzo evinced a very harsh look
at his ethnic roots:

     As a child and in my adolescence, living in the hell of New
     York’s Neapolitan ghetto, I never heard an Italian singing.
     None of the grown-ups I knew were charming or loving or
     understanding. Rather they seemed coarse, vulgar, and insult-
     ing. And so later in my life when I was exposed to all the
     cliches about lovable Italians, singing Italians, happy-go-lucky
     Italians, I wondered where the hell the moviemakers and
     storywriters got all their ideas from. (“Choosing A Dream” 13)

      Puzo rejected lyrical references to his past in favor of being an
ethnic tough guy. Yet his primary images throughout “Choosing” are
those of “Dreaming” and “Escape,” and the way to “escape these uncon-
genial folk” was to “become an artist, a writer” (14). Even here, Puzo
knows that in their hard work, the Italian Americans he describes were
already “more American than [he] could ever become” (13), and he simu-
lated the classic outsider’s stance against work, love, and commitment.
Although he married early and had five children, Puzo continually chafes
against the domestic role in these essays, nowhere affirming the massive
bonds of family and honor that shore up The Godfather against all Corleone
enemies, internal and external. Instead, he knows that when he wrote
about “these illiterate men and women, he “felt a condescending pity,”
for “I did not understand that they simply could not afford to dream.”
Puzo, however, wrote, “I would make my escape. . . . I would be rich,
famous, happy. I would master my destiny” (14). The clash and disso-
nance in his lines between the realized Italian men and women present
in real American time and his artist’s thin cry for integrity and space
already set Puzo’s stance toward his lineage and writings. Rather than
explore their richness, his first instincts were to flee into bildungsroman/
kunstleroman, the archetypal modernist flight for the young writer. The
adjectives he uses, rich, famous, and happy, are generalized American Dream
                                Mario Puzo                                55



images from the “good life” that in Puzo remain stubbornly resistant to
all specificity.
      What’s crucial is how innocent his appraisals are, yet how they are
also encased in an Old World and more mythic “destino,” a strongly
fated, ingrained sense of the Italian immigrants: “To refuse to believe that
an almighty force predetermined the fate of all people was to court di-
saster” (Gardaphe Italian Signs 81). Such a pattern is the cultural and
instinctive source of Puzo’s dominant vision of authority and of the
negative cast to any personal freedom that the characters in The Godfather
and, by extension, all his characters feel. The only escape is into arts and
dreams, never into an America of diversity or heterogeneity. While Puzo
rebelled against the Italianita of his life and putative destiny, he was most
comfortable fleeing the social and cultural subject in the time-honored
modernist renunciation of church, nation, and ethnicity.
      It was in the library of the Hudson Guild settlement house that
young Puzo devoured books, beginning with tales of Indian warfare on
the American frontier, then up through the adventure novels of writers
such as Rafael Sabatini, and culminating at age fourteen in the discovery
of Dostoevsky’s suffering heroes, whose tragic and egotistical centering
on self in reflexivity captured Puzo’s boy’s heart and his writerly sense
of a grand passionate way of being. After discovering Dostoevsky, Puzo
writes, “I had always hated religion even as a child, but now I became
a true believer. I believed in art. A belief that has helped me as well as
any other” (24). In a gratuitous fashion, Puzo brings in his abhorrence of
religion along with its replacement, in a familiar modernist mantra, but
even the off-hand “as well as any other” suggests that he is referencing
such stereotypical affiliations and shifts without being deeply held by
any of them. Here is a common Puzo use of rhetoric. He often wishes to
speak in abstractions (religion, art) that are lofty and potentially grand,
but then to show his weariness, his mastery of the transcendence or
abjection, he deflates the language into slackness (“as well as any other”).
For example, he’s bemused by his own “innocent getaway” from “baffled
loved ones” and his girlfriend into World War II (28). Puzo as imagined
criminal performs his “getaway” from the family he could not love and
embrace. He’s pleased that his country had “ordered” him to defend it,
much as Michael Corleone had been ordered back into family service to
avenge his father’s shooting. His own chronological literary production
follows the pattern of his life. The Dark Arena would become the postwar
novel he lived in Germany, while The Fortunate Pilgrim is the novel of his
childhood and family life before his first “escape” into military service in
1941. The Godfather becomes the dream, the mythical tale that partially
came out of his roots or experiences or ambitions but provided him with
a fictional father to revere, emulate, and finally supplant in power and
love, as well as a son’s destiny to both leave the family and return to it
in heroic triumph. Fools Die then functions as the retrospective of both
56                               Chapter 2



Puzo’s actual adult experience and his writing life, while creating his
first three novels.
       Wondering in “Choosing a Dream” why he became a writer, Puzo
thinks, “Was it the poverty or the books I read? Who traumatized me, my
mother or the Brothers Karamazov? Being Italian? Or the girl sitting with
me on the bridge as the engine steam deliciously made us vanish? Did
it make any difference that I grew up Italian rather than Irish or black?”
(28) This series of questions is admirably comprehensive, referencing
class, reading, oedipal musing, early epiphany, ethnicity, and race. How-
ever, it comes in Puzo’s usual off-hand listing with no attempt to inte-
grate or oppose terms or states of being. While we might, in our current
overheated critical climate about identity, actually appreciate a veteran
professional writer who can so off-handedly mix and not match the fun-
damental content of fierce critical debates, we can also see why no one
would take Puzo very seriously as a writer through such cursory self-
examination; his self-scrutiny is broad but not deep. He won’t go much
further than conclude with the fruits of his enormous success. Thus, to
the above questions, Puzo answers, “No matter. The good times are
beginning. I am another Italian success story. Not as great as DiMaggio
or Sinatra but quite enough. It will serve” (29). Puzo finally chooses to
dream of other things than Italianita or literary success. He’s more ener-
gized by the synthetic pleasures of self-pity, male isolation, Hollywood,
Las Vegas, and gambling as Fools Die will show.
       “The Making of The Godfather,” the carrot essay in the collection, is
disappointingly scant on the writing of the novel or on the screenplay
collaboration with Coppola on the first film. The thirty-six-page essay is
divided into two parts, “The Book,” (33–41) and “The Movie,” (41–69),
already showing Puzo’s 1972 awareness that The Godfather, soon to be-
come the best-selling American novel of the 1970s, was destined to be
dwarfed and “covered” by the Academy Award–winning Godfather films
as had happened to Gone with the Wind and its epic screen adaptation
(1936, 1939). Puzo already knows what his audience wants to hear about
in “The Movie” section of the essay: Hollywood anecdotes about casting
the film, a confrontation with Frank Sinatra in a restaurant over the
character of Johnny Fontane in the novel, a depiction of the world of
producers and directors. Furthermore, in “The Book,” Puzo just isn’t
interested in sharing the secrets of his craft. He has no impulse at all to
emulate a James or Conrad in their prefaces or reflections. His first sen-
tence sets the tone: “I have written three novels. The Godfather is not as
good as the preceding two. I wrote it to make money” (33). He continues
to describe the difference by stating, “I was forty-five years old and tired
of being an artist,” owing twenty thousand dollars to relatives, finance
companies, bookmakers. He decided it was “time to grow up and sell
out” and agreed to do a book his editors had been urging him to develop
from the minor Mafia tales embedded in corners of The Fortunate Pilgrim;
                                Mario Puzo                                57



“just give me enough money to get started,” he told them (34). While
Puzo always refuses to go into depth about his feelings, he’s often admi-
rable in his refusal to either self-aggrandize his successes or complain
about his failures.
       It’s intriguing to note that Puzo welds together his weariness in
maturity as “selling out,” with money owed as the problem and money
advanced as the solution. He’s determined to ground The Godfather in
material rather than aesthetic markers he had revered. Writing about the
Mafia to get out of debt is equivalent to going to the Mafia to get the
money needed to get out of debt. The writing thus becomes the localized
move to “go bad” against the legitimate artistic currency of his first two
novels. Immediately after providing the facts of the matter, Puzo repeats
his most revealing statement about his writing: “I had been a true be-
liever in art. I didn’t believe in religion or love or women or men. I didn’t
believe in society or philosophy. But I believed in art for forty-five years.
It gave me a comfort I found in no other place” (34). The decision to
write The Godfather becomes a true leave-taking for him, a farewell to his
author’s dreams of becoming a high-culture success. However, what does
the belief in art mean when all the subjects that art might address or that
might comprise that art are negated or discounted? A bleak poverty to
his renunciations of art strips the aesthetic of any of its subjects or emo-
tional or rational contexts. Art is segmented off as a talisman, a religion
in and of itself and one that has failed.
       “The Book” section of “The Making of The Godfather” never does
describe Puzo wrestling with the text of The Godfather but finishes with
an extension of the money anxiety evinced in the decision to write the
book at all. He recalls a cascade of financial haggling and windfalls,
notes about advance payments, the sale of paperback rights, telling his
family about the book deals, the sale of movie rights, his animus against
book tours and interviews, statistics on various best-seller lists. and how
long The Godfather stayed on top of the charts. Societal and class markers
that changed his economic status and that of his family become the real
story. Finally, a rueful short paragraph ends the section: “The book got
much better reviews than I expected. I wished like hell I’d written it
better. I like the book. It has energy and I lucked out by creating a central
character that was popularly accepted as genuinely mythic. But I wrote
below my gifts in that novel” (41). Puzo here hits two key points about
his success. The novel’s melodramatic “energy” keeps the Corleone fam-
ily story hurtling forward, and the father and son team of Vito and Michael
Corleone mythically encode Freudian, epic, ethnic, capitalist, self-made,
and male literary images of enduring power. For millions of readers and
viewers, such achievements by Puzo were plentiful and thrilling.
       Such slash-and-burn rhetoric by Puzo immediately after The
Godfather’s success as novel and film appeared to sever radically his
actual career and professed fictional aspirations. Much of the following
58                               Chapter 2



commentary will attempt to regain or reopen the dialogue between Puzo
and the novelist’s art, to not let his statement stand that The Godfather is
such a decidedly inferior work. No author can will such a complete
break from his past or future texts. The Godfather must stand in relation
to other works in Puzo’s very long career. To begin to place his venera-
tion of and then denial of art in a series of contexts is to discover what
forces Puzo sought to harness or control as well as the larger cultural and
social climate that, in another critical trope, was in effect writing him.


       The Writerly Politics of Choosing a Dream:
             Puzo and Bourdieu’s Habitus

      Bourdieu’s The Field of Cultural Production is the most comprehen-
sive theory of a sociology of culture to be presented in the West in the
past several decades. He attempts to situate all cultural producers and
consumers along a range of class distinctions, affiliations, and practices
in order to understand a full field in which relations can be determined
through both individual and class habitus, “the set of social conditions of
the production, circulation, and consumption of symbolic goods” (9).
Bourdieu would reject the direct relating of an author’s individual biog-
raphy to a specific work of literature; however, he would use that infor-
mation extensively and break it down to show an author’s examined and
unexamined decisions, standards, and impulses to create what he or she
would believe to be “art” or a “popular” work. He would, in his own
terms, be interested in a Puzo, for example, as “social agent as producer”
(11), as an author “who lends coherence to the ‘mental structure’ of [his]
class” (13). Key for Bourdieu is that the cultural or literary field inhabited
by any one author is naturally subordinate to the field of power relations
in general in which art functions as a symbolic capital, more or less
traded in a market in which the author has a stake and is a stake. An
author creates within the ruse of imaginative creator, while he or she is
played within a system of hierarchical representation that has already
slotted that author as canonical or noncanonical, popular or elite,
multiethnic or mainstream. Within the dominant class, one that acknowl-
edges the role of symbolic artistic capital, the author always has a domi-
nated role because of a low degree of economic capital (15).
      How might Bourdieu explain a Puzo in the full curve of his writer’s
ambitions, long frustrations, great success, and drifting aftermath? One
of Bourdieu’s laws of capital is that within the dominant class, cultural
capital decreases as one moves from the dominated to the dominant
fractions of society (45), that in effect Puzo loses his stature (certainly in
his own mind) when he writes The Godfather. The relationship of “mutual
exclusion” between material gratification and the recognition by one’s
peers, the success of a huge best seller set against the recognition as a
                                Mario Puzo                                59



writer of the generation of Mailer, Vidal, and Styron that he would have
craved—all coalesce in Puzo’s Godfather crisis at age forty-five, which
Bourdieu might explain thusly: “Aging, which dissolves the ambiguities,
converting the elective, provisional refusals of adolescent bohemian life
into the unrelieved privation of the aged, embittered bohemian, so often
takes the form of an emotional crisis, marked by reversals and abjura-
tions which often lead to the meanest tasks of industrial art . . .” (50).
Thus Puzo’s trajectory could be reinterpreted as a bad faith abjection,
which from the depths of Godfather success, he could write “The Making
of The Godfather” and Fools Die on his “own terms” as the newer, bigger,
and more hollow success he felt himself to be after renouncing “art.”
      Bourdieu writes of the “eternally displaced writer,” one who is
“always out of step.” His example is a French prose epic writer of the
nineteenth century, Leon Cladel (1835–92) who resigned himself to a
form of the rustic novel in which he self-indulgently depicted the peas-
antry, country life, and country people “without that holy roughness of
touch which distinguishes the early manner of the master painters” (69–
70). One can posit a Puzo who was driven to The Godfather by lack of
commercial success and canonical notice, a Puzo who writes a more
synthetic Mafia tale out of the headlines rather than a complex multiethnic
treatment of the interlocking of family and business, American success
myths, and Sicilian history. Bourdieu conceives of an “anti-intellectual
populism, more or less conservative, in which ‘the people’ [in Puzo, read:
“the Family”] are once again merely a projection in fantasy of relations
internal to the intellectual field” (70). To cast The Godfather in such a
dynamic, the family becomes the final arbiter and raison d’etre for any
action, no matter how morally circumscribed. These actions are justified
against a larger America identified with a naive and lumbering entity of
good intentions and potential individual rights and freedoms that cannot
be joined by the ethnic subject or overtly opposed by him.
      One of Bourdieu’s largest questions is to what extent an author
caught in such a system can ever be completely aware of his socio-cultural
habitus, given the author’s traditional propensity for levels of meaning,
self-scrutiny, and the self-reflexive nature of authorial production, whether
overtly privileged in the text or simply inherent in it. Bourdieu’s conclu-
sion is that “lucidity is always partial” and is a matter “of position and
trajectory within the field, so that it varies from one agent and one moment
to another” (72). Clearly, Puzo in “Choosing a Dream” and “The Making
of The Godfather” has a depressed grasp of his decades-long struggle to
carve out a significant career, and it’s precisely at the moment of The
Godfather’s extraordinary success that he can more confidently renounce
his belief in art shored up by economic rather than artistic capital. In his
action, he writes backed by the Corleone family in a transmuted way,
their powerful Italian and family identity conflated with his own, with
the might of their reception behind him. The literary-cultural production
60                                Chapter 2



of The Godfather is Puzo becoming Vito and Michael Corleone, to be
reclaimed by an Old World network of assumptions and values. Puzo
himself reverts back from the chase for high-culture recognition in the
elite marketplace to becoming a writer of the people (those victim
Corleones) for the people (a mass readership). The ironies surrounding
his writing the blockbuster best seller are patterned out in the trajectory
of the hero within that very text. Michael Corleone becomes ethnic in his
identity again, becomes the avenging family hero, and leaves America,
college, heroism, and “reputation”; Puzo follows close behind.
      Yet Puzo has unfinished writerly business within his habitus, and to
find his deepest hunches and wounds, one must track back through his
renderings of the artist in The Godfather itself, specifically in the roles and
relations of Johnny Fontane and Nino Valenti. For where Puzo described
himself “writing below his gifts,” he was very precisely writing about
the use and abuse of such gifts through his two Italian crooners. This
unremarked ongoing storyline in the novel sinks out of Coppola’s movie
and critical notice, but it has crucial points to make about Puzo’s fictional
ethic and ethics.


                The Ballad of Nino and Johnny

      Although Puzo begins “Choosing a Dream” in The Godfather Papers
by announcing that when growing up, he’d never heard an Italian sing-
ing, the characters of Johnny Fontane and Nino Valenti in The Godfather
are expressly portrayed through their singing styles, audiences, and the
way they use their talent. As is well known, Puzo’s Johnny Fontane is
loosely based on some major anecdotes of Frank Sinatra’s career in his
rise to Hollywood power, his early 1950s problems with his singing voice,
and his reputed ties to the Mafia. Nino Valenti is Johnny’s boyhood
chum, a “big, muscular, snotty looking Italian guy” (316), a terrific but
undeveloped singer whom Johnny finally coaxes to Hollywood where he
briefly prospers but then spirals down into suicidal drinking and abuse.
Nino has characteristics, physical and otherwise, that link him to Dean
Martin, Sinatra’s running mate in the “rat pack” beginning in the 1950s.
Johnny and Nino are much favored by their Don, Vito Corleone, who can
never resist doing them services. They are godsons, figuratively out of
the family business and literally out of the line of fire. Johnny is central
to the Jack Woltz Hollywood plot and reappears whenever the action
shifts back to California and Las Vegas. He recovers his voice and singing
career through throat surgery and solidifies his power in the movie
business. Nino is the sidekick, the jokester, the unassimilated paisan whose
death wish is not plumbed by Puzo and whose terminal depression is
another loose end in the novel.
                                Mario Puzo                               61



       Such a summary of their roles in The Godfather does not address their
position as artists, singers of both popular songs and traditional folk bal-
lads in a number of styles. I want to suggest that Puzo in the crisis of
writing The Godfather below his gifts created a bifurcated view of talent in
its responsibilities, development, and use as popular art. Johnny and Nino
at one level are a double meditation on art and more likely an expression
of the various urges in one artist—their author Mario Puzo. Of all the
major and minor Italian American characters in The Godfather, only Nino
Valenti fails to make the cut in Coppola’s and Puzo’s screenplay for the
first film. As Nino hovers around in The Godfather in his genial yet morose
way, the screenplay has no place for him. He’s a more raw and
unconstructed Johnny Fontane, who himself is buffed by the record indus-
try and Hollywood into a national sex symbol, while Nino stays home in
the neighborhood. Johnny’s restoration as godson and entertainment in-
dustry mogul is paralleled by Nino’s Hollywood seduction and demise.
No one and nothing can save Nino while Johnny’s throat, career, and
influence can be “fixed.” What is the ballad of Nino and Johnny for Puzo?
       During the band’s refreshment break at Connie Corleone’s wedding,
“a young man named Nino Valenti picked up a discarded mandolin, put
his left foot up on a chair and began to sing a coarse Sicilian love song.
Nino Valenti’s face was handsome though bloated by continual drinking. . . .
He rolled his eyes as his tongue caressed the obscene lyrics. The women




 Our Gang in full regalia at Connie Corleone’s wedding (Godfather I).
       Courtesy Museum of Modern Art/Film Stills Archive.
62                               Chapter 2



shrieked with glee and the men shouted the last word of each stanza with
the singer” (20). Nino spontaneously creates a bond with the whole audi-
ence, both men and women. His singing is bawdy and suggestive, with no
attempt to package himself. His chosen instrument is charmingly archaic-
ethnic. He’s not hired; he plays in no one’s band. As Johnny Fontane
sweeps into the wedding garden, he instantly draws a crowd, both family
members he knows and the guests who know him only by his records.
When Nino calls to him from the bandstand, Johnny recalls their boyhood
days, and they embrace. With Nino accompanying him on mandolin, Johnny
is transformed back to his roots, and he too chants “the words to an ob-
scene Sicilian love song,” complete with suggestive body language by
Nino, a song with a “sly, double-meaning tag line that finished each stanza.”
The wedding guests were all proud of Johnny for “he was of them and he
had become a famous singer, a movie star who slept with the most desired
women in the world” (34), yet he had come to pay his respects to his
Godfather. Nino and Johnny’s “set” concludes by lifting Connie up be-
tween them so that through a “mock battle and wooing,” they use their
“voices like swords” until Johnny “with the most delicate courtesy” allows
Nino to take the bride from his arm (35).
      Clearly this first scene between them establishes the power of the
ethnic folk art that Nino practices; the people envelop Johnny, reputation
and all, but he defers “with delicate courtesy” to Nino, an aesthetic choice.
At this point, the art of the song is integrated for the occasion and sung
to family by extended family. Nothing is produced or marketed for any-
one beyond the moment. Johnny and Nino are equilibrated in their ritual
love song to the bride. Yet the aura of Johnny’s celebrity is everywhere—
a movie star, seducer of world famous women, holding the “hearts of
fifty million women in his hands” (35). In the Corleone compound, on
this day of family celebration, Johnny, Nino, songs, their rendition, the
audience, the venue are all organic and give pleasure as well as eager
audience participation and response.
      However, when Johnny and Nino are removed from the penumbra
of Corleone environment and authority, their arts and lives begin to
crumble. Despite being the hearthrob of a nation, Johnny in Hollywood
is a “dumb romantic guinea” as his WASP movie star wife calls him and
adds, “you still think screwing is really like those dopey songs you used
to sing” (12). Johnny’s voice has gone bad, and his sexual performance
is affected as well. As a singer, he loved “clean phrasing. It was the only
thing in life he really understood and he knew he understood it better
than anyone else on earth” (160), but now he didn’t dare sing for anyone,
especially as part of a seduction, and he can’t bear to listen to his records.
In the depths of his insecurity, he summons Nino to Los Angeles for
companionship and trust, and they begin to do studio work together.
When Puzo in effect decides to become a “rackets guy” himself to write
The Godfather, he renounces his belief in art. Nino never makes the leap
                                Mario Puzo                               63



to “crook” status and remains pure, on the outside of all corruption.
Never having to make his bones in the Family or in Hollywood, Nino-
Puzo is authentic, truth-telling, lovable, obscene, drunk, and a gambler—
and thus himself pure. Nino’s not constricted by any of the Family’s
murderous pressures or by any of Puzo’s writing pressures and ambi-
tion. At other moments he functions as Johnny’s conscience and takes
him out of embarrassing situations. Always in the background is the
unspoken truth or threat that Nino is the real artist, though it is Johnny
who has the nostalgia for his own major period: “He had been good,
damn good. He hadn’t realized how good he was. . . . He had been a real
artist and never knew it, and never knew how much he loved it” (190–
91), the regret at his own naiveté somehow stamping him with the better
part of himself, a Ninolike lack of self-knowledge.
      Johnny is a Hollywood record company professional creation and
Nino the coarse neighborhood mandolin player. Puzo is both figures and
neither at the same time. He’s amused by Nino and sentimental about
Johnny. Taken together, the folk artist covered by the best-selling singer
and movie star, no place of integrity is left for the serious artist (read
novelist) to sing like Nino and succeed like Johnny. Puzo inscribes these
emblems of art and an artist’s craft in The Godfather. Johnny and Nino are
minor notes strung through the family mayhem and the popular epic of
immigration. Nino drinks himself to death without further explanation.
What makes him so sad? He’s fully sexual, talented, loved by the Family.
Why can’t he be saved or assimilated into some family arrangement?
Why can’t Nino “choose a dream?”
      I’m tempted to the hyperbolic conclusion that Nino’s death is that
of the ethnic artist and Italian son in Puzo, twin identities that will not
survive in him. Nino isn’t a killer for the Don, can’t be bought by Hol-
lywood, loves his booze and gambling, and refuses to take seriously
even the structure that writing The Godfather brings into being.2 However,
Puzo is clearly on point in The Godfather, never wishing to slow down the
hurtling narrative self-reflection. Fools Die will be Puzo’s lengthy text of
lessons learned and tales to tell without a driving narrative. It’s in the
corners of the tangential sections of The Godfather where Nino and Johnny
play, in Las Vegas and Hollywood, that Puzo reveals the most about
negotiating his way through his habitus in scenes that end up on Coppola’s
cutting room floor as he made his film stay on course as a tight family
melodrama of authority and its succession. Nino asks repeatedly in the
novel, in every way possible, “[W]hat am I doing here? What is this life?”
These are Puzo’s questions as well.
      One other major minor character is cut from the Godfather film. He
is Jules Segal, a surgeon with skills to rival Johnny’s in singing, Luca
Brasi’s in mayhem, and Bonasera’s as undertaker using all his powers to
make bodies “live.” Although Nino fades out, Johnny Fontane has one
more moment of drama in The Godfather when he has a throat operation
64                               Chapter 2



to restore the full power of his singing voice. The operation is performed
by Jules Segal, a renegade doctor, who describes himself as “the brightest
young surgeon and diagnostician on the East Coast until they got me on
an abortion rap” (318), who had been taken up by Don Corleone who
was impressed with his courage. In keeping with the theme that every-
thing can be fixed by Don Corleone, Jules Segal is also a miraculous artist
as surgeon. His most famous operation in the novel is his tightening of
Lucy Mancini’s pelvic wall, which cures her vaginal “ugliness” (she can
only be satisfied by Sonny Corleone’s “blood-gorged pole” when the
novel turns epic in size). Jules and a fellow surgeon work on poor Lucy’s
body in some of the novel’s most repellent prose. In the end, Johnny’s
voice does equal Lucy’s vagina as an organ of pleasure, and Jules can fix
them both. But just when the male reader cringes or, if female, looks for
revenge, Puzo himself seems to understand the nonsense, the sheer giddy
oversexed and sexist prose. He has another doctor comment to Jules that
“if society would only be realistic, people like you and I, really talented
people, could do important work and leave this stuff for the hacks” (315)
and “you’re going to waste . . . Jules. Another couple of years and you
can forget about serious surgery. You won’t be up to it” (316).
      Such arguments well describe an author such as Puzo in his quan-
daries about writing The Godfather. At the very moment of his most sexist
trash in the text, Puzo summons one “surgeon” (read novelist) to tell
another that this sensational stuff will kill ya’ for serious work. Puzo in
The Godfather Papers remarked that most critics have missed his casual
irony, but this time he scores. Yet the symbolic critique is a mere footnote.
Lucy and Jules live in Vegas in sexual bliss, and Nino passes away. Yet
Puzo’s intuition that after The Godfather, he wouldn’t be “up to it” is
borne out in Fools Die, at the end of a decade of complete and utter
Godfather success.


            Merlyn in Fools Die: “Going Under”

      Puzo chooses to conclude The Godfather Papers with a sad little col-
lection of diary excerpts from his early years as a writer. He tells his
readers that the entries are to him now “embarrassingly egoistic” but
that “now older and more cunning . . . I resist the temptation to cover my
tracks” (233). “Notes From an Unsuccessful Writer’s Diary” covers the
years 1950–53, during the writing of The Dark Arena and concludes nine
months before that novel’s acceptance for publication in January 1954.
Puzo takes us through his personal crises as a writer struggling to raise
his family, carve out space for himself, and get his work done. He’s full
of rather conventional doubt and self-loathing and a defeatism that never
rises above bourgeois anxiety about his chosen role and his ability to
achieve success. Placing this piece at the end of The Godfather Papers, a
                                Mario Puzo                                65



volume in which he might have been expected to, if not give himself a
festschrift, at least bask in the glow of his achievement, suggests that Puzo
was in 1972 still possessed after The Godfather by the memories and de-
mons of early humiliation and sustained failure.
       Fools Die in effect is the extension of “Notes From an Unsuccessful
Writer’s Diary” into a very long book, the first half of which (to p. 283)
concludes with the author hero John Merlyn becoming financially well-
off through the sale of paperback and film rights to his new novel. Books
1 through 4 of Fools Die flesh out the thirteen pages of “Notes” with
fidelity. Then the novel lumbers back and forth among New York, Hol-
lywood, and Las Vegas through a number of movie, gambling, and lit-
erary characters and anecdotes before mercifully coming to an end at
over five hundred pages. Though Puzo hoped to stitch Fools Die together
through his focus on gambling and luck, to write a popular novel about
the interlocking worlds of Hollywood and Las Vegas, his real subject
here is his own writerly life. The obligatory trappings of a post-Godfather
blockbuster never materialize. Puzo was rich in novelistic capital after
The Godfather and could have written and published whatever he wished.
That Fools Die often appears unedited, even in the rudimentary shifts in
mood, tone, and voice, that it stalls and then lurches forward, suggests
the editing-publishing confidence in Puzo’s aura. He was not the first
newly famous novelist or film director to receive carte blanche and then
produce an indulgent botch of a work. Yet there’s every reason to believe
that this was the novel closest to his sensibilties and his quarrel with his
universe, not the war novel (The Dark Arena), the ethnic family novel (The
Fortunate Pilgrim), or the mob melodrama (The Godfather). Millions of
Godfather aficionados were now ready in Fools Die to begin the long march
of a serious writer in America, ready or not, and read about Puzo’s
passage, as he broke his decade-long silence in fiction.3
       Puzo’s writer, John Merlyn, comes to the reader as an orphan with
no desire to find out anything about his origins: “I have no history. No
remembered parents” (57). We hear nothing about a real last name, noth-
ing about foster parents; he joined the army at fifteen, lying about his
age. After the war, he enrolled in writing courses at the New School
because “everybody wanted to be a writer” (57). And just like that, Fools
Die inaugurates a hero both blank and an artist. Puzo astonishingly has
distanced himself as far as possible from an Italian American identity in
his famous best seller. Fools Die, in a stubborn defiance, will cancel his
audience’s expectations. This book will be about the writer, not immi-
grants, Italian Americans, or major social events. Since Puzo is hardly an
experimentalist or a psychologizing novelist, Fools Die had to proceed by
anecdote, the potentially self-conscious material of a novel about a nov-
elist sunk in everydayness. Puzo writes about “love,” “life,” “men,” and
“women,” all the subjects he tells us he didn’t believe in any more in
“The Making of The Godfather.”
66                               Chapter 2



      One early scene in Fools Die catches Merlyn’s frustration and anger
at his lot. Diagnosed with a diseased gallbladder at a veterns’ hospital in
Manhattan, he is hit by an enormous pain while working at his night job
during Christmas week. He takes a cab to the hospital where he’s left off
a half block from the entrance. Another wracking seizure drops him to
his knees in the street, and Merlyn writes, “I remember rolling over once
to stop the pain and rolling off the ledge of the sidewalk and into the
gutter. The edge of the curb was a pillow for my head” (62). He sees
Christmas lights twinkling from a store: “I lay there thinking I was a
fucking animal. Here I was an artist, a book published and the critic had
called me a genius, one of the hopes of American literature, and I was
dying like a dog in the gutter. . . . Just because I had no money in the
bank. . . . That was the truth of the whole business. The self-pity was
nearly as good as morphine” (62). The “dog in the gutter” simile is not
original, of course, nor are the class resentments at his lot as an uncom-
pensated writer. The injustice of it all is mainlined into self-pity. Art
cannot stave off physical misery and social humbling, and Merlyn’s no
good to himself or his family when it’s Christmas without any dough.
Pointedly Puzo did not add to this scene in Fools Die his later statement:
“that’s when I decided to become rich and famous,” as if that’s a life
choice. He did so in one of those public epiphanies after the fact so
beloved by interviewers, in an anecdote about his Christmas agony re-
counted to Time about a 1955 gallbladder attack just after the publication
of The Dark Arena.4
      Puzo had already transmuted this material into The Godfather when
Vito Corleone is shot in the street in an assassination attempt before
Christmas while he is buying fruit from a stand: “The first bullet caught
Don Corleone in the back. He felt the hammer shot of its impact. . . . The
next two bullets hit him in the buttocks and sent him sprawling in the
middle of the street. . . . The gunmen fired two more hasty shots at the
Don lying in the gutter” (80). At no point in the novel is the Don in more
dire peril or in a more exposed state. This shooting sets in motion all of
the novel’s major events, including Michael’s revenge killings on Sollozzo
and McCluskey and his eventual take-over as Don. Puzo made the im-
mediate reaction to the Don’s riddled body highly public as opposed to
his own lonely crawling through the gutter to the hospital entrance. Police
cars scream toward the site of the Don’s shooting, and following Daily
News photographers snap pictures of everything in sight. Michael, trysting
with Kay in New York City, first learns of the shooting when he sees the
front-page news photo “of his father lying in the street, his head in a pool
of blood”; his first reaction is “cold rage” (79), a hint he has begun to
metamorphose into an executioner and his father’s true son.
      Far from Merlyn (and Puzo’s) lonely gallbladder attack, imprinted
mostly on Puzo’s dark sense of his own failure, the Don rises again from
his pain to become himself, and Michael is his son in whom he will be
                                 Mario Puzo                                67



well pleased. The family consequences, the miracle of recovery, and the
notoriety given the shooting in The Godfather completely reverse Puzo/
Merlyn’s sick anonymity in Fools Die. Puzo/Merlyn pays his debts to The
Godfather scene when he lies to his gambler buddies in Vegas about his
gallbladder scar: “I was in the war. I got hit by machine-gun bullets” (48).
Within the nominal two novelistic scenes of Christmas, pain, the gutter,
and the hospital, Puzo shows how the melodrama maximizes the effect
of the image in several ways, while Merlyn’s caviling enervates and is
remarked but without energy for the rest of the novel. Generic in its self-
pity, it’s not used in genre.
      “Going under” is Puzo’s nightmare image in “Notes.” He feels
completely isolated from wife, children, and their emotional contact:
“Everyday life has such poverty . . . with writing or another art you have
a shield against life as well as an integrating force” (235). Gauging his
impact, he writes, “I do not inspire confidence, or love, or trust, or faith,
or respect” (245), a male crisis that allows him to constantly play the
victim, not savagely or bitterly but rather doggedly in his refusal to give
up the sad pleasures of artistic hermitage. In Fools Die, a decade after Vito
and Michael Corleone have placed the identity of family and its security
above every other human entity and goal for millions of readers and
viewers to affirm, Merlyn turns on the family to reveal it as the accusing
millstone from the larger society, the entity for which he feels most re-
sponsible yet is unable to provide for or truly give himself to. He hovers
in his basement study, like some tinkerer at a hobby, year after year
grinding out the precious pages, alternately taking several small jobs or
quitting his jobs to get sustained writing time. Fools Die weirdly depicts
a zone of noncontact with wife and children. They are markers by whom
Merlyn can take his emotional temperature when he emerges from his
creator’s cave: “My wife put up with me for five years while I wrote a
book, never complained. She wasn’t too happy about it, but what the
hell, I was home nights. When my first novel was turned down and I
was heartbroken, she said bitterly, ‘I knew you would never sell it’ ” (76).
Merlyn feels stunned by this further rejection and retreats to his favorite
locale to brood and think: “Gambling in Vegas, I figured it out. Why the
hell should they be sympathetic? Why should they give a shit about this
crazy eccentricity I had about creating art? . . . They were absolutely right.
But I never felt the same about them again” (77).
      Gambling and Las Vegas are magic for Merlyn, the self-proclaimed
magician, who sees himself as a “degenerate gambler,” one who can’t
always help himself. Merlyn (and Puzo) are most comfortable philoso-
phizing from the gaming tables. In fact, Puzo wrote accompanying text
to a picture book, Inside Las Vegas (1978), published the same year as Fools
Die, in which Puzo suggests that “family and gambling could be equated
as time-consuming vices” (20) but that gambling has “bettered” his char-
acter by forcing him to write more since gambling put him repeatedly in
68                               Chapter 2



debt (8), and “I gave [gambling] all up because I had no time to write
and I was trying to finish a novel” (165). For Puzo, nothing is privleged
over gambling, certainly not writing and family. He knows they should
be, but he’s honest enough about his own character to admit that hasn’t
always been the case. He states that he knows “as a social human being”
that it would have been better to earn his money by hard work, but the
money he really loved came when he had no control, for “the whole
magic power of gambling lies in its essential purity from endeavor, in its
absence of guilt” (341). Merlyn would have liked his life and loves to run
on an economy akin to that of gambling: “In short, how I would like to
be loved in a way never earned so that I would never have to keep
earning it or work for it. I love that love the way I love the money I win
when I get lucky gambling” (65). Gambling is not work, and its purity
is rather like art but doesn’t require the long unrewarded years of disci-
pline that writing does, whereas family is an instantaneous producer of
guilt and is never not work.
      Rather than write as an adversary to the middle class, Merlyn is
more of a secretly discontented man to whom appearances are still
important; he’s careful rather than relentless. The “magical” part of
Merlyn wants to feel “mystical” about “pure, untainted” art and write
“universal characters,” while he reserves his wife and children as an
occasional sanctuary to which he could return “and all the pain would
vanish because I’d have supper with my family” (68). Merlyn manipu-
lates family as rationale for action, haven against the world, and as the
millstone that makes freedom for any man impossible. A world of fam-
ily pressure that was vividly brought to life in The Godfather is pallid
and cramped in Fools Die.
      Merlyn when not being “magical” in the service of fiction muses
most about Las Vegas and big scores. Puzo’s account of Merlyn’s becom-
ing a “crook” is instructive for the way criminality weaves its way into
Puzo’s consciousness as not just subject but almost precondition for fic-
tion, especially popular fiction. Merlyn “became a crook” initially through
his Civil Service job as administrative aide to army reserve units during
the Korean War (94). Through the selection process of army reservists,
Merlyn gets to play a complicated game of sheltering certain young men
from service in return for laundered kickbacks and perks. Yet in the
middle of his extended explanation of the genesis of his dealings, he
writes that “the only thing I wanted to do was create a great work of art.
But not the fame or money or power, or so I thought.” The greatest
influence on him was The Brothers Karamazov, which gave him strength
and told him “about the vulnerable beauty of all people.” Then he knew
his calling: “And so all I wished for was to write a book that would make
people feel as I felt that day. It was to me the ultimate exercise of power.
And the purest.” He works on his first novel for five years, and it makes
                                Mario Puzo                               69



very little money, while called “a genuine work of art” by some critics.
When Merlyn cannot get a publisher’s advance for his second novel,
what he hopes would be his Crime and Punishment, he stops writing and
flees to Vegas. On his return to New York City and family, “it became
clear. To become the artist and good man I yearned to be, I had to take
bribes for a little while. You can sell yourself anything” (98).
      Once Merlyn gets into the swing of his crookedness, he is more at
peace than he has been in years: “The truth was that I had become a
happy man because I had become a traitor to society” (certainly the
Corleone career trajectory), and “I figured out that I was getting my
revenge for having been rejected as an artist. . . . For my complete lack of
worldly success. And my general uselessness in the whole scheme of
things” (106). Merlyn’s reasoning is classic bourgeois artistic resentment
portrayed openly and clumsily by Puzo. Nine years after publishing The
Godfather and creating a monumental criminal in Vito Corleone, who has
gone outside the law not because of minor family problems, money, or
needing time to write, but for seeing his whole family destroyed in Sicily,
Puzo takes the reader through Merlyn’s tepid little staged confessional.
Fools Die appears closer to Puzo’s heart and gut, the contrived bourgeois
thievery, the bribing and fixing. The Corleones were mythic self-justifying
avatars of the process that drove a pinched and discouraged Puzo to the
writing of The Godfather in the first place. Fools Die is Puzo’s act of con-
trition whereby Merlyn’s incentives to finally go bad and write for the
big book are those realistically provided by very common class markers:
lack of money, family needs, male humiliation.
      Such incremental moments are best expressed when Merlyn takes
on book reviews and magazine piece work once the bribes kick in: “I was
a pure storyteller, a fiction writer. It seemed demeaning to me and my art
to write anything else. But what the hell, I was a crook, nothing was
beneath me now” (115). Criminality extends to going against literary
potential as well. Merlyn writes pulps, war stories, soft-core porn, “flashy
snotty film reviews,” “sober snotty book reviews.” He never signs his
real name, knowing he is “an artist, but that’s nothing to brag about.
That’s just a religion or a hobby. But now I really had a skill, I was an
expert schlock writer,” whereas he hadn’t even been “a really first-rate
bribe taker government clerk” (118–19). As Merlyn prepares for his sec-
ond gambling trip to Vegas with all his bribe money in tow, he kisses his
wife “partly out of affection but really to make sure she would not awaken
when I dug out the hidden money.” He tells his wife he must write
before he leaves, edits for an hour while she sleeps, and then goes to the
closet with the big trunk full of “all my old manuscripts” of the first
novel. Forty thousand dollars is hidden under the manuscripts, carbons,
and re-writes “of the book I had worked on for five years and had earned
me three thousand dollars. It was a hell of a lot of paper” (131–32).
70                                Chapter 2



Merlyn carries the swag to the kitchen table, where he counts it, sipping
his coffee. He then zips the bills into his Vegas “winner’s jacket” and tells
his wife in the morning that it’s notes for the article he’s writing on
Vegas, his “cover story,” literally and figuratively.
      Puzo writes a short deft scene here where instead of having Merlyn
whine or philosophize about his plight as artist, his manuscripts is con-
verted into paper money at the bottom of the closet trunk, money not
earned by the artist but by the “crook,” then reconverted back from
dollars into fraudulent notes for the article that sends him on his gambler’s
way to Las Vegas. The illegal money is first “covered” by story (the old
manuscripts) and then the money is “covered” by more story (the bogus
article notes) for the Vegas trip. The double reconversion of the bills is
bound to writing, yet not earned by it, and implicated in Merlyn’s writerly
and life decisions. An aura of timid, domestic hoarding is evident here—
hall closets, kitchen tables, kissing the wife good night, and pleading
work. Beneath pages and pages and years of hard work is the bribe
money, the printed bills—better than marital sex, better than writing, and
holding out the promise of a wondrous Las Vegas payoff. Merlyn’s deep
structural identity is that of “artist as crook”; such is the sad fall created
by Puzo from the family power so identified with the Corleones in the
pages of his great success.


                    Puzo and Norman Mailer

      Merlyn stubbornly refuses to go away but is weary of himself and
his labors. What ploy Puzo uses to flog himself and the reader through
the second half of Fools Die is to create Osano, an improbable Italian
American Norman Mailer as powerful literary success, goad, confessor,
role model, writing buddy, and cautionary tale. By doing so, Puzo sig-
nals that, in Fools Die, he’s going the Mailer route. Of all the venues open
to Puzo in fiction after The Godfather, he chose to give us himself as
subject in Fools Die, his career as text, his gambling obsession as control-
ling metaphor for art and life. It wasn’t really an act of hubris on his part.
He’d always been quite honest as a writer and refused the sort of self-
aggrandizing postures that might have helped make his way. His char-
acters aren’t wild egotists or particularly self-reflective. They don’t analyze
self or the larger culture obsessively, nor do they sense they march in the
flow of history. In short, they don’t fit the profile of Norman Mailer.
What caused Puzo to enter the fictional lists with a Mailer manque as
a character?
      Puzo (b. 1920) and Mailer (b. 1923) are almost exact contemporaries
on different trajectories of striving and success. Both writers begin their
careers after World War II in an intensely ambitious male cohort that
returns home to launch writing lives in a literary climate that privileges
                                 Mario Puzo                                71



the American novel as a holy grail, a Great American Book that could be
written about a society thrust onto a world stage as the victor in 1945
with a full half-century’s legacy of both American expansion and mod-
ernist artistic growth. The preceding generation’s careers of Hemingway,
Faulkner, Thomas Wolfe, Steinbeck, and Fitzgerald provided varying fables
of public-private success and visibility for writers such as Mailer, Saul
Bellow, James Baldwin, Gore Vidal, and William Styron. By 1968 when
Puzo writes a negative review of Mailer’s Armies of the Night and scores
him in a mock-Paris Review interview on his contemporaries, Mailer is
America’s foremost postwar man of letters with as many successes in
nonfiction and essays (The Armies of the Night, Of a Fire on the Moon,
Advertisements for Myself, The Presidential Papers, “The White Negro”) as
in eclectic, sporadic novels (The Deer Park, An American Dream, Why Are
We in Viet Nam?). His early fame in 1948 with the publication of The
Naked and the Dead coincides with the start of Puzo’s work on The Dark
Arena. Between Naked and The Deer Park (1955), published the same year
as The Dark Arena, Mailer becomes more of an ideologue and flamboyant
public intellectual, publishing only one short didactic novel, (Barbary Shore)
but embroiling himself in left-wing politics, cultural criticism, and New
York’s bohemian and drug scene. In the same period as sketched out in
The Godfather Papers, Puzo anonymously slugs it out in a series of low-
paying Civil Service and other jobs, fitfully works on his first novel, and
feels family and responsibilities for finances pushing him under. Mailer
graduated from Harvard in 1943 and stated that after Pearl Harbor, he
had already been “worrying darkly whether it would be more likely that
a great war novel would be written about Europe or the Pacific” (Adver-
tisements for Myself 10). On another front, Puzo “graduated” from his
dead-end job on the railroad in NYC in 1941 at the time of Pearl Harbor
and was liberated from family and ethnicity by the war.
      Wanting to become a truly hybridized American writer, Puzo un-
doubtedly admired Mailer’s freeing himself to be his own created persona.
The one part of himself that Mailer most wanted to destroy was that of the
“thoroughly nice Jewish boy,” thereby expunging a hyphenated American
identity as he pursued rather openly the myth of supplanting a Hemingway.
Puzo had to admire this in Mailer, consciously or unconsciously. The Dark
Arena is full of Hemingway accents and strips its Italian-American pro-
tagonist of much recognizable ethnic identity. Puzo’s male characters are
Hemingwayesque in their square-jawed stoic defeatism, and he ends the
novel with a death reminiscent of that of Catherine in A Farewell to Arms.
Then Puzo spent years writing The Fortunate Pilgrim and The Godfather.
With these two novels, he became not only an Italian American writer for
good, but then a best-selling writer through a novel that refused him criti-
cal capital. He had sought neither multiethnic distinction nor blockbuster
status, and both placed him farther away than ever from a Mailer, who by
1969, in the year of The Godfather’s publication, was riding a wave of
72                               Chapter 2



critical and public acclaim for his powerful nonfiction about the
1960s American cataclysm and his visionary grasp of American history
and mythos.
       I note these hypothetical parallels and differences between Mailer
and Puzo before looking at Osano in Fools Die to point out how large
Mailer must have loomed on Puzo’s screen, how he had achieved every-
thing an American ethnic writer of talent in Puzo’s generation could have
achieved by age forty-five (the age Puzo had stopped believing in art as
he tells us). How does Puzo intuit the curve of Mailer’s career in a way
that makes some sense of his own career and choices, as well as the critical
responses to his work? Puzo mentions Mailer in a witty little send-up of
the much-praised Paris Review writers’ interview series; in a putative book
review in which he plays both subject and interviewer, he asks himself,
“[H]ow come you people never ask writers about money?”; instead the
questions are about pages written per day, pen versus typewriter, repre-
sentations of sex but never “how much they got for their paperback rights?”
(82) Puzo asks Puzo, ‘’Can Norman Mailer really scrounge a hundred
grand advance just by picking up the phone?” and implores the Paris
Review just once to “interview a guy like Harold Robbins. Then your col-
lections will really sell. And don’t forget to ask how much he makes” (87).
When asked if he knows Mailer’s work, Puzo replies, “I know that work
all right. He’s a crook. He was an honest, believing writer until the pub-
lishers worked him over when he was trying to peddle [The] Deer Park.
Now he’s a crook, his last two novels dastardly crimes committed in cold
blood and in full view of the public. . . . He should just scoop up his loot
and make his getaway fast” (85).
       By the time of Mailer’s An American Dream and Why Are We in Viet
Nam?, Puzo can only describe him and his work in terms of criminality
(crook, crimes, cold blood, loot, and getaway), basically the same rhetoric
he would use to cast himself in the decision to write The Godfather and
in Merlyn’s views of his own descent into a literary “underworld” in
Fools Die. In 1968, Puzo was already “covering” Mailer’s career in many
ways with his own, preparing for the psychic transfer to Osano a decade
later. His mention of Mailer’s attack on other writers refers to Mailer’s
continual habit of writing of his contemporaries, especially in Mailer’s
notorious “Talent in the Room” essay in Advertisements, in which Mailer
comments on his generation of male writers in Olympian, instinctive
hunches about their work and weak points.5 Of course, Puzo was be-
neath Mailer’s written notice, circling in the outer reaches of the literary
universe in which his generational cohort was shaping the canon of
postwar American fiction to 1970. Mailer’s sense that “the past did not
exist for us,” that there was “a frontier for my generation of novelists”
after World War II conveys some of the heightened melodrama of the
novelist’s role that sweeps Puzo along in its wake for decades. Other
Mailer pronouncements sound like anthems for Puzo from the stereo-
                                 Mario Puzo                                 73



typical “now there are too many times when I no longer give a good
goddam for most of the human race” and the ironically reversed “I had
the freak of luck to start high on the mountain, and go down sharp while
others were passing me” to, most tellingly for Puzo, “I have been a cheap
gambler with [my talent]” (426). Everything about Puzo’s 1950s in The
Godfather Papers (perhaps akin in Puzo’s mind to Mailer’s Advertisements)
suggests it was his true crisis decade, the racking self-doubt of whether
the first novel could be completed, its sinking beneath public notice, the
continuing humiliation of family handouts and low-level jobs, the anxi-
ety of finding time to write balanced against family responsibilities. In so
many ways, Mailer lives the high success version of the resentments and
insecurities that Puzo lives below the bar. Mailer has to fight to keep
himself raw enough to be the psychic outsider. Puzo merely lives on the
edges looking in; he’s a less flamboyant man and a tamer artist. There-
fore, if Puzo really did feel himself shadowing Mailer in his writerly
disaffections on the lower frequencies, it would make sense for him to
finally create an imaginary Mailer for Fools Die.
      Puzo’s sympathetic mention of Mailer’s publishing problems with
The Deer Park suggests that somehow it was that novel—its writing,
publishing, and reception—that made Mailer a “crook,”and Fools Die
appears to be Puzo’s The Deer Park. Merlyn and Osano in Fools Die ap-
pear to have real antecedents in Mailer’s The Deer Park two decades
earlier. Like Merlyn, Mailer’s protagonist is also an orphan, one who
never knew his mother, whose father gave him away at age five. Sergius
O’Shaughnessy’s own lineage is “mongrel”—mixed Welsh-English,
Russian-Slovene—but he poses as an Irishman with all that implies in
wit, romanticism, and literary talent. Also like Merlyn, Sergius comes out
of the orphanage in his teens with only one ambition, “that some day I
would be a brave writer” (25), for “I always thought there was going to
be an extra destiny coming my direction. I knew I was more gifted than
others” (23). Sergius swings in the novel’s arc from Greenwich Village to
Hollywood; with the mobility of a lover and artist, he lives on the fringe
of both the New York literary world and the film capital. Even though
the reader sees very little of his special gifts, his symbolic capital is high:
he opens a bullfight academy in the Village (shades of Papa Hemingway)
and begins a bullfighting novel. He can conclude, “I had the intolerable
conviction that I could write about worlds I knew better than anyone
alive” (303). Sergius is a vintage hipster, the fictionalized embodiment of
Mailer’s 1950s theorizing that culminated in the brilliance of “The White
Negro” (1957). Mailer’s best short story, “The Time of Her Time” (1959),
placed in Advertisements after “The Talent in the Room,” follows Sergius
through sexual warfare, as a “messiah of the one-night stand” (434).
Recasting Mailer as the Italian American writer Osano is a bit of cross-
ethnic subconscious revenge, as if Puzo is saying, very well, if you wished
to become Irish Catholic in persona for Sergius O’Shaughnessy, let’s see
74                               Chapter 2



if I can make you Italian American as well. If Mailer was willing to throw
himself into an orphan-writer-assumed ethnic identity, Puzo would seem
to say he’d be fair game for Puzo himself to go Mailer one better and
disappear completely into the orphan identity of Merlyn, a character
with no past, real or imagined, and a Mailer/Osano to scrutinize and
watch self-destruct.
       Merlyn’s real sleight-of-hand is to begin his long account in Fools
Die with a three-page fragment that the reader later learns is the only
completed part of Osano’s ambitious and long-promised manuscript, the
novel he hoped would bring him the Nobel Prize. These first pages are
a stream of largely self-referential maxims of fictional promises to be
kept in what we are about to read, along with a list of subjects to be
covered: “The poor struggling genius world, the crooked world, and the
classy literary world. All this laced with plenty of sex, some complicated
ideas you won’t be hit over the head with . . .” (4). Puzo-Merlyn wants
Mailer-Osano around so that he can show the rise and fall of talent in
conflict with ambition and self-destructiveness. As he takes on a review
assignment for a journal essay on Osano, Merlyn writes that Osano “didn’t
know I was out to kill him because I was an unsuccessful writer with one
flop novel published and the second coming hard” (122). Puzo catches
none of Mailer’s language, intelligence, wit, or breadth of interest as he
writes through Osano who’s an obscene boor, full of blunt opinions about
life, love, and literature, almost as if Sonny Corleone or Jack Woltz from
The Godfather had been fitted with a muse and sensibility and had changed
careers. Osano is raw sexuality and aggression with hardly enough rhe-
torical control to make us believe he could sign a piece under his own
name. Indeed Merlyn begins to ghost-write material for him as confidante,
editorial assistant, and finally literary executor. When Osano dies of ad-
vanced syphillis, Merlyn assumes control of Osano’s last unpublished work
and mistress but loses both. Rather than provide what a reader might
expect—an All About Eve or Misery consuming the Osano figure in blind
ambition or rage—Puzo settles for Merlyn’s gloomy takeover of a largely
empty Osano, whom he reduces even further. Thus a diminished great
American writer confirms Merlyn’s own defeatist view of literature.
       What hanging with Osano provides for Merlyn is a way for Puzo
to give his own views on art through analogies and then to critique his
own character from the standpoint of a Mailer with some of the most
insightful personal criticism Puzo ever allowed himself. Merlyn believes
that an artist doesn’t need sensitivity, intelligence, anguish, or ecstasy,
but rather “the truth was you were like a safecracker fiddling with the
dial and listening to the tumblers click into place and after a couple of
years the door might swing open and you could start typing” (233). First,
Merlyn transforms art and its inspiration into theft, patiently trying vari-
ous combinations until he hits it with no volition or creative leap, but
rather, the way is clear, and in the presence of the wealth of the safe, the
                                  Mario Puzo                                 75



words begin to flow. Only in the presence of the contents of the safe can
he “start” writing, which is theft plus the presence of riches to be appro-
priated. This negative art writing is contrasted by Merlyn with what he
learns writing for the pulps: “[I]t was a skill I had, finally a craft. I wasn’t
just a lousy fucking artist” but “Osano never understood that” (233).
What Osano does understand, however, is Merlyn himself beyond all
defenses, and in his criticism of Merlyn, we may come as close as we can
to Puzo’s self-estimate. As he names Merlyn his executor, Osano psy-
chologizes Merlyn, notes his dependence on bourgeois security and fam-
ily, and scores his lack of success with half his writing life gone: “ ‘You
live in your own world, you do exactly what you want to do. You control
your life. You never get into trouble and when you do, you don’t panic;
you get out of it. Well, I admire you but I don’t envy you. I’ve never seen
you do or say a really mean thing but I don’t think you really give a shit
about anybody. You’re just steering your life” (243). On the one hand,
many of these traits are those of the traditional American hero, a man
questing for personal freedom, looking for autonomy, cool under fire. To
live in his “own world” would also describe exactly the kind of environ-
ment that Vito and Michael Corleone try to build for the family, and their
lack of panic is the stuff of legend. Yet Osano also pierces Merlyn’s bleak-
ness; much of his complacent decency and lack of aggressiveness is sim-
ply a hardness of heart. Merlyn emerges as a conflicted, not complex
signifier: part existential male hero, part terminally depressed worker
bee. What Osano’s analysis means for The Godfather’s creator becomes
clear. Puzo largely cashes in the dream of art to identify with the dream
of Don Corleone, the father who will never fail his family or cease to
control his life. Corleone power will thrill millions, but when the tum-
blers finally fell and the safe door swung open to great success, the safe
was empty, as far as Puzo was concerned. Puzo had no identity after
The Godfather.
       Puzo cleverly weights the give and take of Osano and Merlyn to
allow Osano to delineate Merlyn for the reader. Osano tells Merlyn that he
just “tries to beat all the traps” and labels him “a safe magician,” for “you
just write and gamble and play the good father and husband” (264), as
succinct a self-description of Puzo as one will find. Merlyn comes back at
Osano with the tame brief that “in fact you could say that life itself wasn’t
a big deal, never mind his fucking literature” (265). Merlyn goes back to
his own writing, and for two years he works twelve-to-fifteen-hour days,
going all out to write a novel that he feels will give him great notoriety. He
sells it to a paperback house for half-a-million dollars. Everyone had warned
him that a novel about kidnapping a child where the kidnapper is the hero
“would not appeal to a mass public,” but his editor tells Merlyn, “You told
such a great story that it doesn’t matter” (280). This unpleasant subject
carried through to great success in the face of moral objections is obviously
Puzo’s answer to those readers and critics who scored him a decade earlier
76                               Chapter 2



for the immorality of the Corleone predators but whose criticisms had
made no difference to the novel’s reception whatsoever. The end of book
4 of Fools Die sends Merlyn to Hollywood to write the screenplay of his
blockbuster, which is never named.
      Fools Die really concludes here, but the novel cascades on for two
hundred fifty more pages of Hollywood shenanigans, Las Vegas skull-
duggery and murder, and a major love affair by Merlyn with Janelle, a
star-crossed Hollywood dream girl who, to his credit, Puzo writes as
honestly and complexly as he ever wrote any female character.6 She stands
as another in the line of doomed Marilyn figures and also a copy of
Mailer’s Cherry Melanie in An American Dream. Somewhere along the
way, Osano dies, largely forgotten after Merlyn’s big score with his best
seller. Merlyn in true fantasy fashion gets to finish Osano’s last big book
but knows, “I had tried to live without illusions and without risk. I had
none of [Osano’s] love for life and his faith in it” (499). Fools Die finally
ends; it has stopped. Merlyn’s family appears conveniently as foil, goad,
problem, or sanctuary whenever Puzo needs them, but we hardly even
learn the names of the children. The gambling material, the Hollywood
characters, the New York scene, Merlyn’s sporadic attempts to either
write hard and long or tell the reader about why he can’t write at all
must be extracted from the tangle of prose. Nevertheless, taken in tan-
dem with The Godfather Papers essays, Merlyn’s attempt in Fools Die to
interrogate Osano and have Osano/Mailer construct a doubly imaginary
Merlyn/Puzo in return yields as much as we were ever to know about
Puzo and his writerly temperament.


                     Puzo and James Jones

      Almost any serious American reader in 1978 could have identified
a reductive portrait of Norman Mailer in the outlines of Osano in Fools
Die. Puzo had a much more straightforward and positive response to the
work of another prominent contemporary, James Jones, who makes a
brief and unnamed appearance in The Godfather that has gone undiscussed.
However, the curve of Jones’ career from the success of From Here to
Eternity (1951) to the negative reception of his massive sequel Some Came
Running (1957) and the literary problems it posited provide further specu-
lation on what Puzo himself may have gleaned from the writerly odys-
seys of “the talent in the room.”
      When Johnny Fontane is bankrolled in Hollywood after Woltz gets
the message, Johnny looks around for story properties to acquire for
production or for his own future film roles. The upshot of Johnny’s get-
ting his plum film role from Woltz was, of course, Puzo’s rendition of
Frank Sinatra winning the role of Maggio in From Here To Eternity from
Harry Cohn at Paramount and going on to win the 1953 Academy Award
                                Mario Puzo                                77



for Best Supporting Actor. Now Johnny’s “brain was really whirring along.
He called the author of the book, the best-selling novel on which his new
film was based. The author was a guy his own age who had come up the
hard way and was now a celebrity in the literary world.” However, “he
had come out to Hollywood and been treated like shit. . . . It didn’t matter
that his book had made him world famous” (175–76). Johnny thanks the
author for the great part and asks him to send a copy of his next novel
because “maybe I can get you a good deal for it, better than you got with
Woltz” (176). The deal is made, and “the second book was perfect for
what Johnny wanted. He wouldn’t have to sing, it had a good, gutsy
story with plenty of dames and sex and it had a part that Johnny in-
stantly recognized as tailor-made for Nino. The character talked like Nino,
acted like him, even looked like him” (189).
      The “second book,” Jones’s Some Came Running ran to over twelve
hundred pages and drove the critics to distraction. An eagerly awaited
sequel to one of the biggest novels of the 1950s, Some Came Running
failed to pick up on the action and romance of Eternity. Most readers
became lost in the endless tale of a war veteran and author, Dave Hirsh,
returning to his hometown of Parkman, Illinois, and struggling to find
both a suitable literary subject and a place in middle-class, midwest
America. Some Came Running was a book of a writer’s frustration as
Dave Hirsh endlessly parses out the meaning of art and life; in short,
Jones eerily rendered the precise curve that Puzo would trace a decade
and two decades later: a best-selling social melodrama followed by an
Academy Award adaptation followed by a brooding and shapeless se-
quel that lacked narrative drive while penetrating deeper into the author’s
psyche. Puzo appeared to admire Jones’s guts and honesty in The God-
father. By 1978 in Fools Die, he had written Jones’s folly as well.
      The roles that Johnny Fontane sees for himself and Nino Valenti in
his nominal Some Came Running adaptation included what came to be
Sinatra as Dave Hirsh and Dean Martin as ’Bama Dillert, working-class
southern philosopher and professional gambler who is Dave Hirsh’s best
friend. A fairly complicated circuit is thus created by Puzo, who first
introduces the reader to a Nino Valenti as a neighborhood guy, then
posits him as a potential Dean Martin (tall, black curly hair, lethargic,
alcoholic, instinctive ballad singer), then gets him his real-life part as
Johnny sees how right his friend would be in the role. Just as Coppola
pruned and shaped Puzo’s vehicle for the Godfather films, Some Came
Running was pulled together into a dramatic and often moving film by
Vincente Minnelli and fueled by terrific performances from Sinatra, Martin,
and Shirley MacLaine as Ginnie Moorhead, Dave Hirsh’s working-class
floozy girlfriend, sometime muse, and goad.
      James Jones’s career parallels those of Mailer and Puzo in its nominal
American rites of passage for the generation of male writers born around
1920. After a troubled childhood in Robinson, Illinois, Jones enlisted in the
78                               Chapter 2



army in 1939, was at Hickham Field in Hawaii on December 7, 1941, and
was wounded at Guadalcanal. He worked consistently at his fiction before
Eternity as the last prominent writing discovery of Maxwell Perkins, the
fabled Scribner’s editor. Jones always considered Some Came Running his
best work, and Puzo may have recognized a familiar American stamp on
Jones’s career, early success and a long writing life stretching thereafter
with critics waiting, knives out. Jones went to Hollywood to support him-
self with film scripts in the late 1950s, much as Puzo did in the 1970s.
Never celebrated for his style or elegance, Jones at his best provided pow-
erful scenes and characters and a deep ingrained honesty. Of Some Came
Running, a Jones biographer wrote that it was “a very different book from
what might have been expected, a difficult book about very unhappy people.
What was original was easy to miss. What was admirable was easy to
ignore” (Garrett 123). What was there in Some Came Running to capture
Puzo’s admiration? As Dave Hirsh slips back into his hometown and takes
a hotel room, he pulls books from his army bag to set on the dresser: “there
were five, all Viking Portables. Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Faulkner, Steinbeck,
Wolfe,” and “the sight of the five books there on the dresser, their pages
swelled with too much reading, their covers dog eared and warped from
too many barracks bags and afflicted with a rash of water and mold sports,
really touched him deeply. He had dragged them half way across Europe,
they had seen a lot of country with him” (12–13). Jones heralds the tri-
umph of modern American fiction here in the texts of the major male
authors Dave Hirsh has venerated but also has to beat, the ones whose
humanistic values would be highlighted after the war as an antidote to
political and historical novels, as a literature of values and the human
condition. Some Came Running’s major battle will be not with Nazis or Japs
but with finding and going with the proper muse in the midst of midwest
and middle-class stasis.
      Much in Some Came Running must have appealed to the Puzo writ-
ing Fools Die. Jones’s largest subject is the writer’s calling and craft; Dave
Hirsh himself wants to create art, a universal story but one full of truth:
“Day-to-day, hard, rigorous craftsmanlike writing, saying all those things
he felt, and thought, and wondered. . . . And the sum, the upshot, the
lump of what he wanted to get said was that each man was a Sacred
Universe in himself and at the same time a noisome garbage pail whose
bottom had rotted out. . . . And that therefore there was only growth,
only change, and the pain of change, and the ecstasy of that pain . . .”
(756). Such are the Olympian coming-of-age thoughts of the American
male writer, made elegant across the Atlantic by Joyce’s Stephen Dedalus,
hyperbolic by Wolfe’s Eugene Gant, and coincident with every cry of a
misunderstood and consciously aesthetic male modernist of large ambi-
tion in Jones and Puzo’s time. Jones is more lyrical and intense than Puzo
would ever be and had a greater interest in sexual energy and tension as
the wellspring of characterization. Dave Hirsh’s inspiration for his fiction
                                 Mario Puzo                                 79



swings in an arc between two women. The ice princess of a writer and
critic, Gwen French, fears his rougher male side and wants to bring out
the great artist in him rather than give him her body. The dim Ginnie
Moorhead, whom he often excoriates, wants only to be with him and be
loved, a people’s heroine. ’Bama Dillert plays Nino to Dave Hirsh’s Johnny,
believing in the gambling life and making the link: “gambling was about
the only profession left any more that had any individuality and freedom
left at all. . . . ‘Except for yore writin, of course, it has ‘em’ ” (580). The
discovery by Puzo in Jones of a fellow author who could make such an
equation of Puzo’s twin loves of gambling and writing must have been
a revelation.
       The inability of Dave Hirsh to seduce the elite muse of Gwen French
or to craft a successful plot-line inspired by proletarian muse Ginnie
Moorhead makes his own big book founder hopelessly. When Dave dies
protecting Ginnie’s life, Gwen and her father eerily do the posthumous
editing on his manuscript, and the tender, sentimental chapters disap-
pear.7 Puzo was vitally interested in a twelve-hundred-page novel that
could be sustained as a writer’s meditation on fiction, and damn the
Jones critics who said that the book had failed. I suggest that Puzo saw
himself in the same position after The Godfather that Jones did after From
Here to Eternity. He was overnight famous, made a huge movie sale, and
had the chance to do screenplays for more and easier money. He came
to Hollywood, felt worked over and more-or-less ignored, as Jones had
done in Puzo’s view, and Puzo writes that sleight into his Jones cameo
in The Godfather (“he had come out to Hollywood expecting to be treated
like a wheel and, like most authors, had been treated like shit” (The
Godfather 175). In any event, Puzo doesn’t create Jones in compromising
dialogue in his Godfather cameo as he did with Mailer-Osano in Fools
Die. He keeps him pure and honorable. The biggest tribute to Jones in
Fools Die is in Merlyn’s emulation of so many authorial traits from Dave
Hirsh in Some Came Running: orphan, war veteran, writer who venerates
the art, depressed center of creativity.


                    Nino and Johnny: Encore

     Johnny Fontane and Nino Valenti spark the Jones connection in The
Godfather. Their relation to their singing takes Puzo to Dave Hirsh and
’Bama Dillert, as ’Bama wonders how in hell Dave can be so tied up in
knots over women and writing. Some Came Running as film makes an
appearance in The Godfather as “the first movie [Johnny] had produced
with himself as star and Nino in a featured part was making tons of
money” (376). Johnny’s sexual desire suffers as his singing voice comes
back; his technique in the studio is better than ever before: “[T]he chords
were true and rich, he didn’t have to force it at all. Easy, easy, just pouring
80                               Chapter 2



out. . . . And it didn’t matter if he fell on his face with movies, it didn’t
matter if he couldn’t get it up with Tina the night before” (382). Johnny
has his art back, and Puzo’s sad renunciation of art can be countered in
a triumphant moment because Johnny’s singing is better than acting,
better than sex. In the next paragraph, Nino Valenti lies near death, not
caring “enough about anything to make him want to stay alive” (382). At
the end of Michael Corleone’s last visit to Las Vegas, he comes to pay his
respects to Nino on his deathbed and tells him the Don is always asking
about him, to which Nino grins and responds, “Tell him I’m dying. Tell
him show business is more dangerous than the olive oil business” (390).
The “olive oil business” has always been the euphemism for murder
throughout The Godfather, and Nino who “speaks death” with nothing to
lose, gracefully references the family but suggests Hollywood is more
treacherous in its blandishments than Corleone service. What’s the par-
able here? Puzo knows that the Corleones are the most dangerous men
alive, but in creating them, he has also gone back on his Ninos, on his
real neighborhood guys from The Fortunate Pilgrim. Nino is beyond the
Corleone family’s help, as is Puzo, who sensationalized the Italian Ameri-
can life and immigrant passage a few short years after The Fortunate
Pilgrim’s hard and rather austere treatment. Nino bows out literally and
figuratively because there’s no place for an honest paisan who wishes to
remain uncommodified in both his art and his life. Neither Nino nor
Puzo is in firm control of this intimation, to be sure, but somewhere
among ethnic guilt, a writer’s view that he is selling out, and Puzo’s own
need to squelch the “degenerate gambler” in himself lies the demise of
Nino Valenti. The final note on Nino’s passing might be that he disap-
peared completely out of the Godfather films, an extraneous figure alter-
nately brooding and cracking wise (never a welcome part of popular
action narrative) and therefore deemed invisible by Hollywood and known
only residually to the novel’s readers and not in the ongoing popular
cinematic saga of Corleone hegemony and tragic fall. Puzo as Italian
American writer and unreconstructed story-teller dies a little here, too,
though beginning with The Sicilian, Puzo will reprise himself for the rest
of his career. However, the exhaustion of Fools Die is in part Nino’s eu-
logy, a novel where all the characters essentially make Nino’s sad jour-
ney toward discouragement and unexplained silence.
       Why does Johnny totally recover his powers while Nino dies? Johnny
is the all-around popular success that The Godfather becomes as book and
film. Must Johnny get stronger as Nino weakens? Must the Sicilian wed-
ding singer fade in comparison to the studio-burnished and surgicially
repaired Johnny Fontane? Is the riddle of Nino’s death bound up with
his authenticity that no one really wants, including himself? Is Johnny’s
euphoria at his “comeback” hollow in the face of Nino’s slow suicide?
Such questions hang as loose connections in the novel where these two
artistic neighborhood pals are decidedly minor figures, the lounge acts
                               Mario Puzo                               81



for the family orchestration of power and violence. Puzo could not high-
light the theme of the legitimate and illegitimate artist in The Godfather.
The popular vehicle about family identity was all wrong. Nor do I wish
to claim that inside the blockbuster family saga was an intricate medita-
tion on art and its costs and blandishments, some hidden meaning that
would make The Godfather’s structure and thematics more complicated.
I would suggest, however, that Puzo was never far from an inchoate
dialogue with himself about art as a religion, family as a cross to bear,
Italian identity as compromised, and writing and gambling as necessary
to him as air.
       Puzo’s view in “Choosing a Dream” that he never heard an Italian
singing when he was young because they couldn’t afford to dream should
put us on notice from the outset of The Godfather that Johnny and Nino
as Italian singers will be figures of some importance to Puzo’s sense of
his rhetoric and its pitch. Puzo does not sing, he does not come in praise,
he does not hope, in some deeply pessimistic and rather grave bow to
both an Old World past and a temperamental disposition. He’s an honest
guy. Not all the magic surgery on Johnny’s voice, a gift from best-seller
heaven, can make Puzo forego the silencing of Nino Valenti, the unrecon-
structed depressive part of himself, the gambler he most loves. Puzo
even gets to take one last shot at his Godfather self when Johnny’s saintly
ex-wife, Virginia, turns on him at last at one point and says, “I never
liked your singing anyway. Now that you’ve shown you can make movies,
I’m glad you can’t sing anymore” (378). Substitute “write” for “sing”
here, and Puzo shows Virginia to be a prophet about the truth of his own
career after The Godfather makes his bones.
       Puzo dropped more clues about his alienation from his writing in
the very last remarks excerpted from his writer’s diary in The Godfather
Papers. In March 1953 he noted, “tried to write a trashy potboiler but had
to give it up. Immoral and uninteresting, that’s why” (246). Could this
abortive attempt have been the genesis of The Godfather? Was Puzo refer-
ring to the subject matter or the characters’ actions as immoral, or was
the writing itself immoral? Did he find the text boring to work on, or was
the writing an uninteresting task? As usual, he was not specific enough,
but we may speculate. In April 1953, after not being able to sell the
manuscript that became The Dark Arena, he writes, “I don’t think I will
ever be able to like anyone again. No matter how good things turn out
later. And won’t be able to think well of myself” (246). In Fools Die,
Merlyn notes about his family that he “never felt the same about them
again” (76–77) after they were angry at his failures to sell his work. Such
turning on both the vehicles on which he was working, his own sense of
self-worth, and his relation to the family estimating that worth show
Puzo caught in early negatives that no amount of Godfather success
could convert into a coherent sense of career. As much as he had been
lionized, he was caught, early and late, in his bourgeois idealism about
82                               Chapter 2



art, its overturning in his early sorrow, and in the appropriation of a
rather stock and tame artist’s revolt at being misunderstood and unap-
preciated. There are no incongruous or cautionary or ingratiating tales to
tell about Puzo’s writerly career. What is interesting is how tenaciously
he held on to his hope of portraying his writer’s disillusion, how hon-
estly he wanted to share with a public hardly wanting to know about
such stasis, how his antennae went out to the work and struggles of
peers such as Mailer and Jones as they patterned out their own affairs
with American success. In 1972 Puzo prefaces his 1950s diary with a
post-Godfather disclaimer that the entries are painful to read, egoistic,
naive about art and life, and “now older and more cunning, trickier with
a sentence, slicker with a phrase, I resist the temptation to cover my
tracks” (233). By 1978, Fools Die in five hundred pages expands on the
fourteen pages of the diary printed here, when the resentment cloaked in
the shards of a Hollywood and Las Vegas “potboiler” is finally the story
he wanted to tell; he has reverted to his truth as he was given to know
it. Whatever else Fools Die might be, it is not cunning, tricky, or slick.
       Bourdieu wrote that “enrichment accompanies ageing when the
work manages to enter the game, when it becomes a stake in the game
and so incorporates some of the energy produced in the struggle of which
it is the object” (Field of Cultural Production 111). Puzo might also be
found concretely as “the experience of a life-condition occupying a par-
ticular position” “within the dispositions of the habitus” (Distinction 172).
The Godfather became the stake in Puzo’s career that turned his long fact
of famelessness around but did not alter his fixed sense of himself as an
early failure. He knew corners and intimations of himself as an economic
marker in literary culture. The deformation of his writer’s character is
projected centrally in Fools Die and through moments of artistic misgiv-
ing in The Godfather. “I’m going down,” says Johnny Fontane to his god-
father. “I can’t sing anymore,” “I have to gamble” (31–33). Don Corleone
rises to his most agitated state in the novel, furiously mimicking Johnny’s
weakness while telling him, “ ‘You can start by acting like a man.’ Sud-
denly anger contorted his face. He shouted. ‘LIKE A MAN!’ ” (37).
Johnny’s “womanly” cries are countered, salved, arrested in develop-
ment, and the Don fixes everything for him in Hollywood, becoming the
father to whom Puzo/Johnny confesses, the father who absolves him
and sends him back into popular culture production armed with the
family’s trust and ability to strike fear into the industry. Puzo’s own
fatherlessness is assuaged in such moments, and in the “trashy potboiler”
tradition, Johnny becomes a winning ticket, having confessed the weak-
ness of his singing voice, the sin of gambling and letting women and
family control his emotions. The Godfather, fittingly enough, is a text where
all can be forgiven and a new start made for the writer and the pop star.
       The ballad of Nino and Johnny folds into the best-selling melo-
drama of The Godfather while Merlyn’s sad tune in Fools Die goes largely
                                Mario Puzo                               83



unheard. The wisdom of the literary transformation of a writer’s capital
and its debits into the roles of Nino and Johnny proves the readerly
power of the best seller’s mythical work, while Fools Die and its discon-
tents are even more generic in the sense of familiar notes from Puzo’s life
and career, which write him as surely as he struggles to write within
their generative fields without creating a real Godfather sequel in fiction.
Few American blockbuster writers in Puzo’s time came close to his desire
to place his whole writerly life before the unwelcoming popular reader.
That stubborn misplaced courage was Puzo’s signing off on his own
mythos, while the transforming powers of the Godfather novel and films
and their dispersal into American language and culture remain what The
Godfather’s audience knows and wants to know.
This page intentionally left blank.
              Part II
Reading The Godfather :
 Critical Strategies and
     Theoretical Models
                  chapter three


            Bakhtin and Puzo:
    Authority as the Family Business
The authoritative word demands that we acknowledge it, that we make it our
own; it binds us, quite independent of any power it might have to persuade us
internally; we encounter it with its authority already fused to it.
                                           —Bakhtin, The Dialogic Imagination

Sonny grinned at him and said slyly, “I want to enter the family
business.” When he saw that the Don’s face remained impassive, that he did
not laugh at the joke, he added hastily, “I can learn to sell olive oil.”
                                                        —Puzo, The Godfather

       After The Godfather nominally changed everything in his writing
life, Puzo considered his elite failure and his popular multiethnic block-
buster success with bemused resignation. In his essays, he played the
unassimilated ethnic son and the unassimilated unsuccessful novelist, as
he moved rhetorically from margin to margin. But in the character of the
godfather, in Don Corleone, Puzo finally found the true “comfort he
could find in no other place.” He came to believe in the Don as he had
believed in art, finding in him the protection he had previously found in
fiction. The Don’s autonomy is Puzo’s extension of the dream of the
power of art, the realm where he can’t be threatened. Art for art’s sake
mutates into the family for the family’s sake. The family business comes
to be the making of authority itself.
       How does Puzo establish and maintain the enormous power of
Don Corleone? My aim is to answer that question through Bakhtinian
analysis. The fit between Bakhtin and Puzo is adversarial. Bakhtin is the
champion of dialogue, growth, and learning from the answering voice.
Puzo’s novel is a text about power and its necessary monologues, stasis,
secretiveness, and denial of the answering voice. I look at strategies of
control in The Godfather and, by way of Bakhtin, at the forces that bid to
break this control apart, both on the plane of Don Corleone’s imperatives

                                     87
88                               Chapter 3



and Puzo’s strategies. I conclude by speculating on the ways in which
these authorial choices in dialogue are those of any novelist who must
shape both novelistic design and characters’ destiny. My view is that the
“family business” in both mob rule and fiction is precisely that of making
authority. I will examine three key scenes in detail: the deathbed ex-
change between the dying Genco Abbandando and Don Corleone, teen-
age Sonny Corleone’s interview with his father after he commits a minor
hold-up, and Kay Adams Corleone’s exchange with her mother-in-law
after her marriage. In each case, Don Corleone’s edifice of belief and
meaning is briefly exposed through questions about truth, morality, and
the legitimacy of the Corleone family and enterprise. Genco as dying
confederate, Sonny as the son who has witnessed his father kill a man,
and Kay as the wife who knows her husband, Michael, is a murderer all
threaten to speak politically.
        M. M. Bakhtin’s exhaustive attempts to describe the dynamics of
language production have become central to much important contempo-
rary theorizing on the novel and what Bakhtin calls the “novelistic.”1
Dialogics, heteroglossia, and carnivalization are now familiar signposts in
critical debate where Bakhtin appears as a man for all current critical
seasons. Derridean in his insistence on the play of language, he appears
to have operated in the Lacanian certainty that language is most severely
transacted in the language of another or the “other.” Bakhtin reminds
one of Foucault when he posits a teeming discourse full of accents with-
out specific subjects. Yet he suggests that all language reflects and is the
mediation of the social structures producing the speakers, a view closer
to Marxist critical theory. His version of reader-response theory would
place the response of the reader, listener, or dialogue participant as oc-
curring almost before language production and dictated by the transac-
tion in communication. Such a transaction belongs neither to writer nor
reader nor to either participant but rather is a boundary event. Finally,
Bakhtin’s work is not limited to literary study; he is claimed by other
disciplines as a linguist, philosopher, and sociohistorian of knowledge.
      Bakhtin’s central categories of Authoritative Discourse and Internally
Persuasive Discourse in The Dialogic Imagination (1981) are expert tools to
describe shifts and priorities in Puzo’s structure of dialogue in The God-
father. Bakhtin defines the “authoritative word” as one that “demands we
acknowledge it,” “that we make it our own; it binds us, quite indepen-
dent of any power it might have to persuade us internally; we encounter
it with its authority already fused to it” (Bakhtin 342). Most relevant to
The Godfather, Bakhtin’s “authoritative word” is “the word of the fathers”
(342). Within the “contact zone,” the authoritative discourse confronts
the potential and also the threat of internally persuasive discourse. The
internally persuasive word “is, as it is affirmed through assimilation,
tightly interwoven with ‘one’s own word’ ” (345). The internally persua-
sive word “enters into an intense interaction, a struggle with other inter-
                             Bakhtin and Puzo                             89



nally persuasive discourses”; “it is open: in each of the new contexts
which dialogize it, this discourse is able to reveal ever newer ways to
mean” (346).
       The struggles between internally persuasive discourses and with
authoritative discourse describe The Godfather’s most interesting dialogues
at points where Puzo and Don Corleone’s edifice of belief and meaning
is revealed in the exposure and recontainment of questions about the
truth, morality, and legitimacy of the Corleone family and enterprise.
Such questions in a general sense are always rising to the surface in any
fictional text for, as Bakhtin points out, “the speaking person in the novel
is always, to one degree or another, an ideologue, and his words are al-
ways ideologemes” (333). Bakhtin provides signposts to the Corleone lan-
guage transactions, which allow us to find our way in the larger collective
transactions in Puzo’s world of murder, business, and family. The sup-
pressions by characters in the text tell us a good deal about Puzo’s crises
of narrative authority and his resultant cover-ups. Bakhtin’s maxim is
that the “author is to be found at the center of organization where all
levels intersect” (49). I want to meditate on Puzo by way of Bakhtin, on
the author’s duties as traffic cop at the intersection, where he manages
free flow and collision, the very carnivalization of the life pulsing there
in its regulation and anarchy.


           Politicized and De-Politicized Speech

       All authors manage all scenes in their novels; “manage” is not by
definition pejorative and does not simply apply to best-selling fiction.
However, Puzo’s choices in The Godfather allow us to examine an author
who “do” the voices in particularly vivid and segmented forms that raise
more questions than they answer. Furthermore, Puzo evidences a prin-
ciple of nervous confrontation of words in authoritative and internally
persuasive discourse, of revelations and then seemingly a forgetting of
the moment of revelation. Popular fiction appears to thrive on the au-
thority of the monologue and its own forgetting. What happens when
dialogue threatens the exposure of that authority in major characters and
their authors?
       Bakhtin’s distinctions between authoritative discourse and internally
persuasive discourse allow us to chart the feints and parries of characters
as they fall in and out of various speech genres in The Godfather. The speech
of Don Corleone is an example of what Roland Barthes in Mythologies
labeled “de-politicized speech” (Barthes 142). Such speech is everywhere
given an eternal justification. “Myth is de-politicized speech”; myth “puri-
fies,” “makes innocent,” gives a “natural and eternal justification” and
possesses a “clarity” (Barthes 143). Almost any address by Don Corleone
may illustrate these characteristics, which are enhanced and performed
90                              Chapter 3



through the ethnic signification which will be discussed in chapter 4. The
counter to de-politicized speech is obviously politicized speech. Barthes
describes it in “Myth on the Left” as speech in which language is opera-
tional and transitively linked to its object, where man is a producer and
“speaks in order to transform reality and no longer to preserve it as an
image” (Barthes 146).
      Dialogics makes dynamic the political positions taken by characters
and narrative voices within given novelistic scenes. Dialogics helps to
identify the power relations within each speech act and what is to be
gained, lost, retained, or overcome by participants in dialogue, including
the voices of the author. In The Godfather, Don Corleone’s rhetoric consis-
tently counters any politicized speech because Puzo cannot often risk the
devaluation of his ruling family’s “natural” currency. Yet in extraordi-
nary moments, Puzo allows a competing rhetoric to challenge Don
Corleone’s de-politicized speech. Puzo then orchestrates the crises in
authority thus represented, in general recontaining the novel’s most in-
triguing scenes and implications. Dialogue is overturned in favor of a
monologic order in plot favored by Don Corleone and his author. My
suggestion is that this orchestration and monologic order is emblematic
of a general popular fiction strategy to both raise extremely important
and emotional issues and then, having aroused reader interest and
sympathy, “solve” the issues in a way that privileges power and narra-
tive drive.
      As his final act on his daughter’s wedding day, Don Corleone visits
the hospital in which his long-time subordinate, Genco Abbandando, lies
in the last throes of a wasting cancer. The scene bears quoting in full and
is numbered into numbered sections for reference below:

     1. The Don bent closer. The others in the room were astonished to
        see tears running down Don Corleone’s face as he shook his
        head. The quavering voice grew louder, filling the room. With a
        tortured superhuman effort, Abbandando lifted his head off his
        pillow, eyes unseeing, and pointed a skeletal forefinger at the
        Don. “Godfather, Godfather,” he called out blindly, “save me
        from death, I beg of you. My flesh is burning off my bones and
        I can feel the worms eating away my brain. Godfather, cure me,
        you have the power, dry the tears of my poor wife. In Corleone
        we played together as children and now will you let me die
        when I fear hell for my sins?”
     2. The Don was silent. Abbandando said, “It is your daughter’s
        wedding day, you cannot refuse me.”
        The Don spoke quietly, gravely to pierce through the blasphe-
        mous delirium.
                             Bakhtin and Puzo                           91



     3. “Old friend,” he said, “I have no such powers. If I did I would
        be more merciful than God, believe me. But don’t fear death and
        don’t fear hell. I will have a mass said for your soul every night
        and every morning. Your wife and your children will pray for
        you. How can God punish you with so many pleas for mercy?”
     4. The skeleton face took on a cunning expression that was ob-
        scene. Abbandando said slyly, “It’s been arranged then?”
        When the Don answered, his voice was cold, without comfort.
        “You blaspheme. Resign yourself.”
     5. Abbandando fell back on the pillow. His eyes lost their wild
        gleam of hope. The nurse came back into the room and started
        shooing them out in a very matter-of-fact way. The Don got up
        but Abbandando put out his hand. “Godfather,” he said, “stay
        here with me and help me meet death. Perhaps if He sees you
        near me He will be frightened and leave me in peace. Or perhaps
        you can say a word, pull a few strings, eh?” The dying man
        winked as if he were mocking the Don, now not really serious.
        “You’re brothers in blood after all.” Then, as if fearing the Don
        would be offended, he clutched at his hand. “Stay with me, let
        me hold your hand. We’ll outwit that bastard as we’ve outwitted
        others. Godfather, don’t betray me.”
     6. The Don motioned the other people out of the room. They left.
        He took the withered claw of Genco Abbandando in his own two
        broad hands. Softly, reassuringly, he comforted his friend, as they
        waited for death together.
     7. As if the Don could truly snatch the life of Genco Abbandando
        back
     8. from that most foul and criminal traitor to man.” (47–48)


1. The Don bent closer . . . for my sins

      The first section of the dialogue is both formally framed and politi-
cally urgent.2 The initial language of Don Corleone and Genco is marked
by Genco’s language of religious supplication as he pleads Lazaruslike
for deliverance from death by the god figure.3 Yet the formality is cut by
internally persuasive images of human men in real time. Don Corleone
weeps to the “astonishment” of people in the room; Genco invokes the
equality of their childhood play. His last phrase, “will you let me die
when I fear hell for my sins?” exposes his fear for his actions and changes
92                               Chapter 3



the register of the dialogue. Now Genco has begun the attempt to drag
the don into human time where they have been murderers together.

2. The Don was silent . . . blasphemous delirium
      Such silence precludes an answering word. Don Corleone does not
wish to enter into this potentially truthful relation to his confederate.
Genco then moves to restore formality as a way of reaching the Don. He
retreats to the conventions of the wedding day supplicant. The Don bids
reply in most formal terms (“quietly, gravely”) “to pierce through the
blasphemous delirium.” Here is an authorial judgment on the danger
inherent in Genco’s speech, one not really intended to answer Genco’s
plea but rather to counter a dangerous precedent. “Blasphemous de-
lirium” is Puzo’s disparagement designed to contain Genco, to show him
as a man out of control, a man about to speak politically. Any language
that may be contained on the level of the sacred and the profane pre-
cludes a dialogue about secular good and evil.

3. Old friend . . . pleas for mercy
         The Don addresses Genco as “old friend,” a knight to his squire.
The ironies of his disclaimers about possessing powers stand in the face
of orders he gave in the novel’s first pages, orders to subordinates to
brutally right the wrongs brought to him by wedding guests. Here death
appears to be what Don Corleone cannot forestall. Such logic is irrefut-
able in this case but conceals in piety his other life-and-death roles and
decisions. Consistent in his role, he will not intervene for Genco any more
than he will personally break thumbs, but rather he will have mass said
by someone else. Women and children will pray for Genco; it is not
man’s (or godfather’s) work. The Don has kept the formal distance from
Genco’s urgency in the authority of de-politicized and highly stylized
speech. Bakhtin writes of this battle to draw discourse “into the contact
zone” where “there is a struggle constantly being waged to overcome the
official line with its tendency to distance itself from the zone of con-
tact . . .” (Bakhtin 345). Authoritative discourse withdraws into its solid
mass of forms and refuses interaction. It is the language of godfathers
but also of the bureaucracies and governments the family influences and
the corporate world they often mime.

4. The skeleton face . . . Resign yourself
       Here is perhaps The Godfather’s most intriguing moment. The tenor
of the dialogue shifts violently as Genco exposes their life-world relation.
The skeleton is “cunning” and “obscene.” It is death speaking, with no
mediation of forms, “slyly,” like a fool or rogue: “It’s been arranged,
                              Bakhtin and Puzo                             93



then?” In Puzo’s best line, the intransitive “it has been” searches for the
“you” to complete its agency, to drag Don Corleone from myth into the
light of common day. Such a move would call up the world of faceless
capitalist deals and murders where Genco and the Don have been so
effective. The business language of arrangements is the pivot between
false and true consciousness about Don Corleone’s role. “It’s been ar-
ranged, then” also suggests Genco’s firm belief in the Don’s terrible earthly
power. Once more, but more forcefully, Don Corleone denies the relation,
their dialogue, and their potential sameness to label Genco as a blas-
phemer, an archaic trope from religious discourse.
       Genco has “blasphemed,” indeed. He has spoken from outside the
naturalized terms of the Don’s power. Without authority he has “spoken
death” and fittingly so, since the shift to the political register of arrange-
ments is where these two old partners-in-slaughter have truly lived their
lives. Genco has no more stake in de-politicized speech; as the “oppressed,”
in Barthes’ terms, “he has only an active, transitive (political) language”
(Barthes 149). Genco speaks death, is death, and finally equates the Don
with death. The Don is the death-bringer, not the life-saver. Such is the
novel’s potentially deepest moral consequence but one phrased to affirm
the Don’s power in plot logic for the popular reader.

5. Abbandando fell back . . . don’t betray me
       Genco is beyond verbal strategies after the Don commands, “Re-
sign yourself.” All his ploys in dialogue have been stymied by the Don
who will not be reached by wedding-day convention, biblical language,
business language, or, most daringly, urgent politicizing of their relation-
ship in an attempt at internally persuasive discourse. Genco shifts to yet
another register, that of old cronies or confederates. He parodies the high
speech acts of supplication and the granting of favors. The “wink[ing]”
and “mocking” suggest a carnivalization of forms, a dance of death by
this skeleton-Genco. Genco reinstates his vision of their equality because
he has nothing left to lose. As Barthes points out, in politicized speech,
the oppressed is “quasi-unable to lie; lying is a richness, a lie presup-
poses property, truth and forms to spare” (148). For a terrible instant,
Genco has abolished the Don Corleone myth and has correctly identified
him as death. Genco drags the Don into one of his few exposures in the
novel. Don Corleone is converted from universal to human: together, the
henchmen will “outwit that bastard [death].”

6. The Don motioned . . . death together
      However, Puzo is not to be outwitted. He swiftly reinstitutes the
Don’s authority in the last ameliorating sentences. The Don answers
through body language and is tentatively drawn on a human scale. He
94                                Chapter 3



takes Genco’s “withered claw” in “his own two broad hands”; they are
peasant boys together, no longer residing on different dialogic planes.
Don Corleone is given a physical presence rather than a disembodied
authoritative voice. The personal entreaty for the Don to act has been
answered but only after such action has been voided of any consequence
by Genco’s parody of their previous speech acts.

7. As if the Don . . . Abbandando back
       Here is Puzo’s most performative flourish in authorial voice in this
passage. From the description of the two old blood brothers awaiting
death, all dialogue spent, Puzo restores the novel’s universal order. “As
if the Don” is one of the novel’s trickiest phrases. As Bakhtin writes,
“authoritative discourse permits no play with the context framing it”
(343). Yet here, it is framed as play, the Don sustaining Genco’s fiction
that together they may have some calming power in the face of death.
This is the mimesis Genco believes in, the miming of mortal and immor-
tal roles. If the voice of the phrase is meant to be ironic, it is Puzo’s voice
and said with annoyance, “as if” the old peasant is simply too credulous
for words. Most likely, Genco and the Don are sustaining the fiction of
the Don’s mythic power, a relief to both of them for different reasons!
Gods do not laugh at others or at themselves in Puzo, nor may they be
laughed at. Popular fiction itself is noticeably humorless, except on “hu-
mor” shelves. The dangerous and insurgent god-play of American au-
thors such as Melville, Twain, Faulkner, and Coover is anethema to the
rigid authority of popular fiction.

8. From that most foul . . . to man
       The way for Puzo to relieve the vulnerability of the “as if” phrase
is by the immediate invocation of the majesty of death as the “most foul
and criminal traitor.” To restore authoritative discourse, the new signifi-
cation is Puzo asking, what can we do about death? Bakhtin refers to
such a monologic author’s statement as a detachable “semantic orna-
ment” (Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics 84). Puzo’s authority is most con-
trived because least realized, a bad copy of the Don’s “natural” language.
Death is “foul and criminal,” a traitor beyond humanity as Puzo in-
dulges in what Bakhtin calls “hidden polemic.”4 The text which had briefly
resided in a death scene of rich implication is restored to its sonorous,
duplicitous normality. Puzo’s authorial narration mimics the Don’s ini-
tial reaction to Genco in the biblical and authoritative speech genres and
conflates the Don’s evasiveness with his own; he does not appear to
understand the difference. “It’s been arranged” refers to deals made by
the author as well. Genco, the old murderer, dies with his insight and is
absolved back into his “family.”5
                              Bakhtin and Puzo                              95



       Puzo has briefly attempted to dialogize the Don’s power but “foul”
and “criminal” traitors are mythical villains to battle, seemingly from
nowhere, with no network of causal elements. Don Corleone’s speech
picks up on the accents of death and urgency in Genco’s voice and ritu-
alizes the replies; to Bakhtin, this is “stylization.”6 As Bakhtin writes, “the
word encounters an alien word and cannot help encountering it in a
living, tension-filled interaction” (The Dialogic Imagination 279). Met on a
human scale by Genco, Don Corleone becomes death. Genco calls on all
their death-dealing understanding and on the richness of language forms
shared between them. Sancho Panza has become the grinning skull who
parodies the wedding-day world of favors. It’s not the limits of power
that have been exposed, as perhaps Puzo would like readers to believe.
It’s the base of power, the murderers’ bond, the calling in of their whole
long history. For Puzo and for the Don, it’s not what they’ve done that’s
blasphemous, obscene, cunning, or sly but rather the dialogue about it.
The mock-horror about blasphemy is really a horror of exposure, the
threat of a non-Corleone victim to speak of lived relations. Such a scene
exposes the authority of popular fiction-making through its drama of
Genco’s suppression.7
       Genco is truly dead. He has fought to keep himself and dialogue
alive within authoritative forms. He remains caught in authority’s mono-
logue about itself. Thus, ruptures often appear at a seam of myth and
fiction in popular fiction, where myth threatens to break apart into truths
about power. The aesthetic damage inflicted by Puzo’s coda denotes his
own fear of fiction. Such exposures of myth’s artifice in monologics in
popular fiction are revealing. They suggest a writer laboring in degrees
of bondage to plot’s monologic within melodrama and often incapable of
sustaining the morality of fictional discourse, which must belong to dia-
logue and politicization. Bourdieu in The Field of Cultural Production calls
such narrative acts “the deceptive satisfactions offered by the false phi-
listine humanism of the sellers of illusion” and posits instead the massive
asceticism of an author (Flaubert) who remains, “like Spinoza’s god
immanent and co-extensive with his creation” (210–11). Such rigor de-
fines neither Puzo’s intent nor his praxis and defines an alternate aes-
thetic of high realism.



                       The Family Business


     A second powerful dialogue scene directly relates to the Don
Corleone–Genco interview in its structure. When Sonny, the Don’s im-
petuous oldest son, commits an amateur stick-up as a teenager, the Don
evinces real frustration:
96                                Chapter 3



     For the first time, the Don met defeat. Alone with his son, he
     gave full vent to his rage, cursing the hulking Sonny in Sicil-
     ian dialect, a language so much more satisfying than any other
     for expressing rage. He ended up with a question. “What gave
     you the right to commit such an act? What made you wish to
     commit such an act?”
           Sonny stood there, angry, refusing to answer. The Don
     said with contempt, “And so stupid. What did you earn for
     that night’s work? Fifty dollars each? Twenty dollars? You
     risked your life for twenty dollars, eh?”
           As if he hadn’t heard these last words, Sonny said defi-
     antly, “I saw you kill Fanucci.”
           The Don said, “Ahhh,” and sank back in his chair. He
     waited.
           Sonny said, “When Fanucci left the building, Mama said
     I could go up the house. I saw you go up the roof and I
     followed you. I saw everything you did. I stayed up there and
     I saw you throw away the wallet and the gun.”
           The Don sighed. “Well, then I can’t talk to you about
     how you should behave. Don’t you want to finish school, don’t
     you want to be a lawyer? Lawyers can steal more money with
     a briefcase than a thousand men with guns and masks.”
           Sonny grinned at him and said slyly, “I want to enter the
     family business.” When he saw that the Don’s face remained
     impassive, that he did not laugh at the joke, added hastily, “I
     can learn how to sell olive oil.”
           Still the Don did not answer. Finally he shrugged. “Ev-
     ery man has one destiny,” he said. He did not add that the
     witnessing of Fanucci’s murder had decided that of his son.
     He merely turned away and added quietly, “Come in tomor-
     row morning at nine o’clock. Genco will show you what to
     do.” (220–21)

      As with Genco, Puzo allows Sonny to pierce the official, powerful
language of the Don with the reality that the Don is the death-bringer.
 Sonny grins “slyly” as had Genco; “slyly” becomes the signature for
politicized speech, that the truth of the Don’s historical reality is to be the
issue. Sonny is the death’s head, as Genco had been, a young execu-
tioner. Sonny also carnivalizes death-business as Don Corleone’s real
business. He earns his language because of his witnessing of the Don’s
first murder, that of a minor New York City neighborhood boss. Instantly,
Don Corleone relinquishes the registers of authoritative speech for “[I]
can’t talk to you about how you should behave.” Now the Don can speak
to Sonny about a career in law, that he could “steal more money with a
                             Bakhtin and Puzo                            97



briefcase” than with guns. This deflection is not enough for Sonny, how-
ever; he presses the Don further through the parody of both father/son
rites of passage and business discourses: “I want to enter the family
business.” When he receives no answer, like Genco in the “It’s been
arranged, then?” dialogue, Sonny realizes he has gone too far toward
challenging authority. He mistakenly invokes the carnivalesque, believ-
ing he can be free to subvert the Don’s authority, but he forgets that Dons
do not laugh at themselves. Sonny then “hastily” extends the “olive oil”
branch, and Don Corleone measures his answer before replying, “Every
man has one destiny.”
      Destiny in The Godfather poses the highest authority, a concept that
Puzo continually invokes and that, he would like us to believe, unites
authority and internal persuasiveness. Puzo’s next line after “destiny” is
author-narrated: “He did not add that the witnessing of Fanucci’s mur-
der had decided that of his son” (221). Such an utterance is the equivo-
cating deflection of the nervous author from the moral responsibility of
the father-murderer to the son and witness: what can the Don do? It’s out
of his hands, as when death was claiming Genco. Destiny has decreed
that Sonny watch his father murder a man. Such contorted, moral sleight-
of-hand denies the Don’s responsibility. The language itself denies agency
as in the previous “It’s been arranged” example: “He did not add that . . .”
and “had decided that . . .” Finally, the whole passage is replete with
halting attempts to counter dialogue: “refusing to answer,” “as if he had
not heard these last words,” “I can’t talk to you about how you should
behave,” “the Don’s face remained impassive,” “Still the Don did not
answer.” What is not spoken and only postscripted in conditional terms
is Puzo’s “blasphemy,” all smoothed over in the restoration of father/son
passage and economic security: “come in tomorrow, my boy, and start
learning your trade.”
      Sonny does not respond but becomes an eager apprentice in the
murderer’s art. Two pages later he has “made a reputation” as a “most
cunning executioner” (223); “cunning” was Genco’s death-head expres-
sion as he spoke of “arrangements.” Puzo’s “he did not add” is his coun-
terpart to the Genco scene’s “most foul and criminal traitor.” In each
case, Puzo must miss the moral point of agency and personal responsi-
bility to keep The Godfather on track as a family melodrama. In the Don
Corleone–Sonny interview, moral agency is deflected onto the witness of
murder; it’s his destiny. In the Don Corleone–Genco interview, moral
agency is irrelevant. Death purportedly is bigger than both of them, and
they are helpless before it. This is undoubtedly true, yet Puzo’s novel has
not earned the statement on the page. Such refusal to parse out simple
chains of motive and result, influence and implication, are symptomatic
of popular fiction’s general defective causality, one that readers can eas-
ily ignore in their march through the plot.
98                               Chapter 3



      Puzo at his most distressingly cosmic suggests that Don Corleone
helped people “not perhaps out of cunning [again . . . ] or planning but
because of his variety of interests or perhaps because of the nature of the
universe, the interlinking of good and evil, natural of itself” (392). “Cun-
ning” is rejected here in favor of a bizarre combination of business and
philosophical language. The “nature of the universe” is about as far as a
novel’s rhetoric may go, and we thrill to the devastating and lasting
effects that authors and characters can sometimes approximate as they
perceive a glimpse of it. But Puzo is not that author. He wants the
“interlinking” of good and evil to be “natural” as well because it relieves
the pressure of censoriousness and judgment waiting to historicize the
Don and his violence.
      Popular fiction lives on the authority of such rhetoric in a literature
of inflation. Characters are represented as monumental: their genitalia,
fortunes, romances, histories, decadence. Melodrama itself depends on
people defined by these massive determinants. In best sellers, which
fixate on the one, the private, the “most beautiful,” “most powerful,”
“wealthiest,” “most evil,” with whom can dialogue ever truly take place?
Perhaps only with the critical reader confronting the author’s design.
That reader may stop and question the contingent moments, the anxious
breaking and reinstating of authority as necessary to domination in both
the Corleone empire and that of Puzo.
      Bakhtin states that the “parodic stylization of generic, professional
and other strata of language is sometimes interrupted by the direct
authorial word (usually an expression of pathos, of Sentimental or idyl-
lic sensibility), which directly embodies . . . semantic and axiological in-
tentions of the author” (The Dialogic Imagination 301). Bakhtin is speaking
of heteroglossia in the English comic novel. Yet his statement appears
just as germane to the relentlessly vast summing up by Puzo in and
around the Corleone melodrama, a world full of traitors and criminals
who are more specific and locatable than death itself and who render
values and value judgments moot. Bakhtin writes of novelists who
achieve an “obtusely stubborn unity,” who “simply [do] not listen to
the fundamental heteroglossia inherent in actual language” (327). Puzo
has this obtuse listener in the Don, who restores the correct monologue
out of authority’s necessity.
      Puzo is tied to his own rigid center of authority in The Godfather.
Bakhtin observes that once an author “has chosen a hero and the domi-
nant of his hero’s representation, the author is already bound by the
inner logic of what he has chosen, and he must reveal it in his represen-
tation” (Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics 65). Thus, Puzo is following a
“destiny” determined by his design, one that is universally male, secre-
tive, monologic, and dominant. Puzo’s design presupposes inevitable
clashes over narrative authority, the border skirmishes that Genco and
Sonny represent, the sudden flaring up into dialogue that promises a
                             Bakhtin and Puzo                           99



different and revealing study of a heretofore unquestioned center. To
drag The Godfather into dialogized relations is a victory, however brief,
for fiction’s democratizing powers. The continual return to the myth of
unbroken power and domination is a lesser “destiny” for The Godfather
with its many potentially insightful moments. The Don’s interviews with
Genco and Sonny are made more dramatic and pathetic by their isolation
and defeat in the larger structure of “destined” authorial control.


                       The Women’s Room

      One direct cry against the Don’s absolute authority and violence
comes from Michael Corleone’s wife, Kay. She asks him, “What if every-
body felt the same way? How could society ever function, we’d be back
in the times of the cavemen” (365). Michael’s response is not really
Bakhtin’s “answering word” at all but rather exposes the limits beyond
which Puzo cannot conceptualize, given the logic of his authorial choices.
Michael invokes his father’s “code of ethics”; he tells Kay the Don be-
lieved that society’s “rules would have condemned him to a life not
suitable to a man like himself, a man of extraordinary force and charac-
ter” (365).8
      To deflect Kay, Michael “grins,” most unsual for him and the rare
but telling signature of carnivalizing in The Godfather, even as Sonny
“grins” in the “family business” interview. Then Michael equivocates,
“I’m just telling you what my father believes,” an evasion that signifies
he has been speaking in another’s discourse. Kay picks up on that and
asks what he believes. Michael tells her he believes in his family but
would like to join society after compiling enough money and power: “I’d
like to make my children as secure as possible before they join that gen-
eral destiny” (365). “Destiny” again is the conceptual bottom line in The
Godfather, here the hazy American good-life future which could be refer-
enced all the way back to the Declaration of Independence. To Puzo,
destiny itself is his limit of conceptualization: it was the Don’s “oft-re-
peated belief that every man has but one destiny” (201)—oft-repeated,
indeed. Puzo writes that Sonny Corleone “had been truly tender-hearted”
as a boy and “that he had become a murderer as a man was simply his
destiny” (266), thus overturning any coherent theory of personality de-
velopment advanced in this century, as well as articulating a complacent
renunciation of ethics and free will. Destiny becomes a deep background
historicization, a prior Sicilian historical moment that determines but is
not present. Destiny inhabits a rigid plot and is nondialectical with no
contingencies. No freedom can be defined from it, as it is curiously both
cause and effect.9 Michael will see to it that his children “joined the
general family of humanity” (411), a neutralized group, an essence pulled
out of time from the American Family itself and thus freed from any
100                              Chapter 3



determinant contradictions. This “general family,” existing everywhere
and nowhere, is ornamental and prematurely Utopian. The general fam-
ily denies the crimes of Corleone family business and is reductive and
historically cynical, as well as hypocritical about an America that the
larger novel argues again and again is not worth joining on its terms,
neither its institutions nor its laws nor its morals.
      Kay’s interrogation extends to another family member, Mama
Corleone. Part of Puzo’s victimization of Kay is the way he places her in
thrall as a convert to the Catholic church, the institution Puzo reserves
for deathbeds and women but refuses to include in his network of cor-
ruptible cultural and social relations negotiated by men. Kay asks Mama,
“[W]hy do you go [to church] every single morning?” (392).

      In a completely natural way, Mama Corleone said, “I go for
      my husband,” she pointed down toward the floor, “so he don’t
      go down there.” She paused. “I say prayers for his soul every
      day so he go up there.” She pointed heavenward. She said this
      with an impish smile, as if she were subverting her husband’s
      will in some way, or as if it were a losing cause. It was said
      jokingly almost, in her grim, Italian, old crone fashion. And as
      always when her husband was not present, there was an at-
      titude of disrespect to the great Don. (392–93)

      All Puzo’s cues toward politicized speech and carnivalization are
here: the “natural” signature heralding Mama as beyond or beneath power’s
notice, the ascription of church power to non-males, the “so he don’t go
down there,” an “impish” acknowledgment of the Don’s evil, structurally
similar to Sonny and Michael’s “grinning” about the family business. With
her “grim, Italian old crone” cast, she even resembles Genco on his death-
bed and speaks tranquilly the lines he read desperately, from the start
“subverting” the Don’s worldly authority, as Genco had done with a wink
only when he had given up hope. These key conversations between Mama
and Kay, the Don and Genco, and the Don and Sonny all represent inter-
views of intense, if tentative, politicization and dialogue where Don
Corleone and his empire might be historicized, where the web of death
and mortal terror for souls, for human complicity and responsibility might
be faced in real time. Kay, through Puzo’s customary silence after politi-
cized speech, does not interrogate her mother-in-law further. Mama
Corleone’s insight dies with her in another brief “attitude of disrespect to
the great Don.” Puzo works hardest to suppress these constructions.
      Kay can hardly remember who she is or what she has been told,
what cause-and-effect relations might apply in her life with Michael.
Puzo constructs dialogue for her such as “You’re really a gangster then,
isn’t that so? But I really don’t care. What I care about is that you obvi-
ously don’t love me. You didn’t even call me up when you got back
                             Bakhtin and Puzo                            101



home” (361). Such a confused statement begins in moral questioning of
a lover but immediately shifts into romance language (anything to be
with you, and I was lonely). Kay as moral touchstone is unreliable at
best—New England Adams or no Adams. She forgets several times that
she has worked out for herself that Michael is, like his father, a murderer,
(237, 360–65, 393). In her last attempt at the truth after Carlo Rizzi’s
murder, she still asks, “[I]s it true?”
      Michael’s reply is one final, duplicitous performance to deny the
charge of being the death-bringer:

     Michael shook his head wearily. “Of course it’s not. Just be-
     lieve me, this one time I’m letting you ask about my affairs,
     and I’m giving you an answer. It is not true.” He had never
     been more convincing. He looked directly into her eyes. He
     was using all the mutual trust they had built up in their married
     life to make her believe him. And she could not doubt any
     longer. She smiled at him ruefully and came into his arms for
     a kiss. (436–37)

Michael’s speech is a one-man parody of dialogue. Not only is there no
“answering word” or chance for one but also the language naming the
moment is one of the granting by his authority of her rights.10 The grant
is similar to Genco’s “rights” on his deathbed, Sonny’s after witnessing
his father as murderer, or Mama’s duties as church “crone.” Michael is
“letting [her],” “giving [her], and “using” trust, all decisions made uni-
laterally at his behest and interspersed with the romantic cliché of gazing
into her eyes followed by smiles and kisses. The woman has inarticu-
lately been set right. Immediately thereafter, Puzo does give Kay the
intuitive knowledge (coded female) of Michael’s death-head power
through the ritualistic body language of himself and his subordinates,
signifying his utter dominance such as “Roman emperors of antiquity,
who by divine right held the power of life and death over their fellow
men” (437). Kay emerges in the novel’s last lines as the new Mama
Corleone, praying for the soul of her husband, a nice, safe irony, which
compartmentalizes one final time Puzo’s sharp segmenting of men
and women, world and soul, heaven and hell, real authority and
transcendant appeals.
      In the novel’s last paragraph, in almost a parody of powerlessness,
of the inability to reach dialogue, Kay “empties” her mind of all she
knows—family, anger, rebellion, questions—to become the perfect avatar
of popular fiction’s lack of memory and consequences. The emptying is
actually one of both fiction and history, of dialogized relations and social
crimes. Dialogue is driven down beneath or rises above the avenues of
power toward prayers, the last transcendant ruse and deflection in Puzo’s
fiction. Kay ends “with a profound and deeply willed desire to believe,
102                               Chapter 3



to be heard . . .” (446), but the making of belief has always been denied
her in the fiction, and she will not be heard by an earthly power, at least
not by this male dominant and its author who powerfully but almost
surely accidentally has concluded with a paradigm of the fear of fiction:
the chance for the answering word in a text of rich possibility. She is now
in league with “the nature of the universe,” sharply segregated from The
Godfather’s historical unconscious, which might include institutions the
Corleones buy off and into, such as the courts, the police, and the politi-
cal structure.
      Kay’s “profound . . . desire . . . to be heard” is validated by Bakhtin’s
declaration that “every word is directed toward an answer and cannot
escape the profound influence of the answering word it anticipates” (The
Dialogic Imagination 280). Just so does Genco seek to know the “arrange-
ments”; his survival depends on them. Just so must Sonny speak the
“family business” of murder to be taken into the novel’s authority. The
“answering word[s]” demanded from Corleones must be about death
and its agency.

      • Kay to Michael: Are you or aren’t you a murderer?
      • Genco to the Don: Can you save me from death?
      • Sonny to the Don: May I kill for you?
These questions about the actual powers and influences of the Corleone
life-world slip in and around the cracks of the monolithic melodrama.
They disturb; they intrigue; and finally, Puzo is not comfortable with
them, any more than the Don or Michael. The questions are too sly, too
cunning—they blaspheme in pronouncing the forbidden thoughts about
the “family business” of “arranged” murders. They must be silenced.11


                        Destiny and Design

      To a considerable degree, the value I find in what I consider Puzo’s
best scenes come from my application of second-order scrutiny to dialogue
such as “it’s been arranged then?” and “I want to enter the family busi-
ness.” I have become what Booth calls the “intending ironist” whose analysis
“is part of the significance the text may acquire” (The Company We Keep 39).
Dwelling in irony slows immensely the reader of a hurtling melodrama
like The Godfather. Puzo needs these challenges to the Corleone life world
of power and authority. Such subversions suggest power has a perfor-
mance aspect, that it must be tested by what it is not in order to be power.
Authority is created by its subversion, which allows authority to act in a
full-blown manner.12 Genco, Sonny, and Mama Corleone speak the Don’s
power tentatively, while the “intending ironist,” the critic scanning the
                              Bakhtin and Puzo                              103



potential Corleone examples, sanctions irony to make sense of their scenes
of power. The discrimination among irony’s different levels and intensities
always confers authority on the critic-reader and his readings.
       Rabinowitz in Before Reading codifies this conferral in his categories of
popular versus serious reading or, as he ascribes them, readings of configu-
ration and readings of signification. With readings of configuration, Rabinowitz
suggests we read expecting a less complex and ironic plot pattern (188). He
stresses that we tend to hold popular and elite fiction up against different
backgrounds. An example might be comparing Princess Daisy to the world
of advertising or to a blockbuster historical romance rather than to The Por-
trait of a Lady or “Daisy Miller.” Popular fiction narratives are “predomi-
nantly functional, plot-oriented, and metonymic” (Rabinowitz 184). Thus, if
I were to read The Godfather as a “configurational” text, I would read the Don
Corleone–Genco, Don Corleone–Sonny, Michael-Kay, and Kay-Mama scenes
as examples of the Don’s great power.13 The specifics of moral judgment
would be suspended or not called into play at all in favor of more functional
questions such as: Are the Corleones powerful enough? Will the Corleones,
especially the Don and Michael, defeat their enemies?
        If we read The Godfather’s scenes to look for moments when power
strains to remain in authority, when power is undercut, we are reading
ironically for inconsistencies, for cracks in the Corleone edifice. At the
same time, if we assume “popular text,” we leap to the assumption that
they are cracks in Puzo’s edifice as well, that it is not in his intent to stop
here and ruminate on the ironies of power, its obfuscations and inhu-
manities.14 To bore in so heavily on the ironic reading of these scenes is
to perform an elite reading of a popular text, to hold that text account-
able in every way to the moral implications of its own statements, either
potential or written.
        A more character-oriented novel text would focus on the psycho-
logical development of the characters in what Rabinowitz calls “opera-
tions of signification” (184). The Godfather ignores one marvelous
opportunity for a dialogized characterization by providing no scenes of
Michael Corleone becoming a decorated World War II hero. In the mili-
tary, in the most traditional popular vision of the American melting pot,
the reader could see Michael in the larger America as a peer in conflict
and exchange. Yet, in the monologic of Puzo’s design, such a scene or
scenes would break the hermetic seal on Corleone solidarity and isola-
tion. The reader knows nothing of what Michael learns in the larger
historical frame experience. Presumably Puzo has a wary conception of
its value,15 but the ironic reader feels this lost opportunity, the absence
and suppression. A life-world experience of great potential is shut down,
due to Puzo’s iron generic rules of configuration. A dialogue with America
is denied as a threat. Michael will not be a Prince Hal among the com-
mon people on his way to the complex authority of kingship. Nor did
Puzo mean him to be. Dialogizing is always inherently a humbling, a
104                              Chapter 3



ceding over, a giving up of essential control in the service of a reintegra-
tion, a further learning. The instrumentalization of this lesson is always
in the design of the author.
      Similarly, other vivid scenes in The Godfather hang like oases, wait-
ing for connection, in this novel so uninterested in psychological truth.
For example, Tom Hagen’s recurring dream of his family and himself
tap-tapping as a group of blind beggars is introduced and then forgotten.
To the ironic reader on the watch for others, outsiders, and doubles, the
potentially rich metaphorical possibilities of Hagen pushing through his
“moral blindness” or coming to sense his guilt are frustrating—but only
if reading for ethical exploration. In popular novels, Rabinowitz writes,
we treat inconsistencies as flaws (188), turning back on their authors the
lack of memory and the “flow” of association. We as interpreters reserve
the right to call “inconsistency” either irony or bad art, and also we may
ironize the entire process at the expense of the author.16
       At rare moments, authors can place the entire dialogized experi-
ence under a complex irony. Consider the plight of Nathaniel Hawthorne’s
Goodman Brown, who at his story’s end has constructed a belief that an
entire foul and evil dialogized world exists apart from his own con-
sciousness. He feels he must live like a spy within it for the rest of his
days, carrying his own secret interpretation like a tumor on his brain and
his heart. Such a shattering conclusion has extreme reference to the
enchaining of dialogue, its brilliant placement in configuration, and its
emplotment from the realm of signification, its psychological resonance
in the psyche of the central character. Hawthorne complicates the
carnivalesque and achieves an overview through a metacommentary of
the varied levels in the curve of dialogue, the irony of association, and
unconscious thought. Or consider Thomas Pynchon’s last rational woman,
Oedipa Maas, in The Crying of Lot 49. Her meditations turn entirely on
dialogue’s efficacy or delusion, on the metaphors of “inside found” and
“outside lost,” on the possibility that dialogue is babble without unity.
Pynchon, too, plays with configurations and signification, makes readers
believe “belief” with Oedipa about the importance of plot as good detec-
tive fiction must, and then cuts away any metonymic chain in favor of
reflexive meaning and hypothesis.
      Such championing of the complex layering of Hawthorne and
Pynchon could stipulate a choice for an elite reading and for metaphysi-
cal speculation. No matter how expressed, in the service of no matter
what logic, an author always writes authoritative discourse in one way
or another. Authors have designs, and when they follow the logic of their
designs, their characters may have destinies. In reading popular authors
through elite critical rhetoric, we usually don’t grant characters their
“destinies” but rather play devil’s advocate and see how the authors
have persuaded us of the destinies set up for characters such as Vito and
Michael Corleone. In reading elite authors, we sometimes say that char-
                              Bakhtin and Puzo                              105



acters who are caught in destinies are tragic. What is the difference be-
tween Design and Destiny in the roles of, for example, two prominent
patriarchs, Thomas Sutpen in Faulkner’s Absalom, Absalom! (1936) and
Vito Corleone in The Godfather? Most fundamentally, Sutpen acknowl-
edges a design, and Faulkner shows it to be blind, immoral, and wound-
ing. Sutpen will not acknowledge women, children, or “others”; he is the
“demon” (to Rosa Coldfield), brooding over his design, not helping any-
one else, monomaniacally not a godfather. Faulkner is unrelenting on
this score. Sutpen is as a bewildered author with a balky, unfinished text;
he wonders aloud to General Compson where he made his mistake (263).
        Puzo does not give Don Corleone the consciousness of a design;
the Don “instinctively” makes correct choices. He responds at certain
moments in his historical life to perceived class and economic oppression
and thereby shapes his destiny; it is not a particular purpose held in
planned intention. Everything about destiny suggests it gains power from
an absent figure or figuration, one predetermined, fore-ordained, out of
the province of human will. To get to this point, popular fiction launders
design as plan or intention into destiny. Here is one reason why Sonny’s
death at the tollbooth in The Godfather carries no resonance, whereas, in
Absalom, Absalom! Charles Bon’s murder of Henry Sutpen before the gates
of Sutpen’s Hundred is shattering. Sutpen does not believe in destiny but
in design; Don Corleone believes in destiny but takes no responsibility
for design. In popular fiction, characters and authors do not speculate on
interlocking roles of paternity and authorship. Such speculation would
overturn configuration, of reading for the plot.
        In Absalom, Absalom!, the magisterial demand by Bon, the son, is
“Acknowledge me, Father.” In The Godfather, the phantom collective de-
mand from all the undialogized victims and chains of implication to the
Corelones is never one of “acknowledge your historical reality, your crimes
in America.” The critic-reader of Absalom, Absalom! reads in line with what
Bon asks as both son and victim, representing Sutpen’s true American
historical reality. However, the reader-critic of The Godfather is more like
Bon before the gates, waiting for a sign, anything that will show Puzo
aware of a moral dilemma of suffering caused, of havoc wreaked. Bon’s
cry “Acknowledge me” becomes the popular fiction critic’s “acknowledge
your progeny, your fiction.” Such criticism calls for the sort of self-scrutiny,
of irony, that authority in popular fiction never allows, that popular au-
thors never undertake in their texts.
       Fathers have designs, while sons have destinies. Authors have de-
signs, while characters have destinies. Critics of moral persuasion want
to refer characters’ destinies back to novelistic designs. When an author
in question appears to resist this probe in the fiction or to play dumb, the
critic smells a rat and retaliates by ironizing the author’s configuration
process for his own ends of playing against the author for meaning rather
than suggesting the author unfolds ever newer and widening meanings.
106                              Chapter 3



Without “inconsistencies as flaws” (Rabinowitz 188), the critic of popular
fiction has no material to work with beyond the continual affirmation of
characters’ triumphs in the plot. The critic reader finds the author’s
pattern. The inconsistency is not “arranged, then” by the popular author,
says the critic-reader but remains outside any pattern of unity in a chaos
of signification.
      Bakhtin again brings us back to fundamentals of our critical scrutiny:
what does it mean to say what we mean in our collision of accents and
voices—as authors, characters, readers, critics. Bakhtin writes of novelists
who are “deaf to organic double-voicedness and to the internal dialogization
of living and evolving discourse,” that they will “never comprehend, or
even realize, the actual possibilities and tasks of the novel as a genre”
(327). He uses descriptions such as “naively self-confident,” “obtusely stub-
born unity,” and “pure single-voiced language” to describe such novelistic
language. These descriptions apply to characters within novels as well,
especially to the Corleones and their mystique of the one, the powerful,
the united—the father and the word of the father, the law.
      The structures and conceptualizations of popular fiction are au-
thoritarian and monologic. When we begin to speak of a politics of char-
acterization, what system does an author choose for his autocratic state,
his oligarchy, his novel? One voice? A confession? A few privileged voices?
A polyphony? A complex frame? Even if characters are granted some
sort of contingent freedom by an author, it is still the author’s choice to
do so with certain characters’ destinies ensuing, if not recontained by
irony. What Bakhtin wants to conceive is nothing less than the ultimate
mimesis, the full field of social reality. Popular fiction shrinks from the
task and is escaping the full description of reality’s forces all the time.
Analyzing the points of collision between key characters in the fiction
often exposes the ideology of the text’s production. If we find where
myth collides with fiction, monologue with dialogue, that is where we
will find popular fiction’s management of narrative in the service of the
unitary and the totalized description, explanation, or solution. We also
find there the popular novel’s power, but it may well be one that the
critic labors into creation, demanding that the law judge the authorial
design of a Mario Puzo in creating the destiny of the Corleones.
      With such demands, the popular fiction critic cuts himself off from
the popular readership and from a kinship with the author. Barthes in
Mythologies concludes that the mythologist “attempts to find again under
the assumed innocence of the most unsophisticated relationships, the
profound alienation which this innocence is meant to make one accept”
(156). Bakhtinian dialogic animates and forces this alienation into pro-
ducing the evidence with which to confront the father, the author. Au-
thority has its inevitable (but not inevitably evasive) design and destiny.
The popular fiction critic’s voice is always another authoritative voice
that hopes to become an internally persuasive one.
                    chapter four


               The Godfather and the
                  Ethnic Ensemble
I’ll tell you one thing you didn’t learn from [Don Corleone]: talking the way
you’re talking now. There are things that have to be done and you do them
and you never talk about them.
                             —Tom Hagen to Michael Corleone, The Godfather

I want them to grow up to be All-American kids, real All-American,
the whole works.
                                            —Michael Corleone, The Godfather

“I warned you, “ Jules said.
“You didn’t warn me right,” Johnny said with cold anger.
                              —Jules Segal and Johnny Fontane, The Godfather

Gino turned his back to hide his face. “The Japs just attacked the United
States,” he said. He turned up the radio and drowned out all the voices
in the room.
                                          —Gino Corbo, The Fortunate Pilgrim

       The Bakhtinian speech act analysis of key conversations in The God-
father conducted in chapter 3 attempts to bring forth the principles of
authority on which the Corleone verbal empire is founded. In the pro-
nouncements and answering words of family members and outsiders, The
Godfather charts a course in which the family triumphs in violence over its
enemies. Yet such a formalist analysis, vital to the understanding of how
moral issues are addressed by any author and any fiction, needs to be
enhanced by reading Puzo as an Italian American author. Dialogics iden-
tifies the power relations within each speech act but does not, in and of
itself, ethnically mark such relations. What happens if we expand our view
to hypothesize reading Puzo ethnically according to gesture, language,

                                    107
108                                Chapter 4



and shared knowledge of intent between Italian American subjects? His
ritualized scenes then take on different meanings. For example, if I state
that Genco calls on their death-dealing past to make his pleas to the Don,
the richness of the language and gestural forms they share must under-
write the praxis of the deathbed scene. Their base of power and their
murderers’ bond is strongly influenced by their boyhood friendship as
well as by the long and terrible history of Sicily as the deep background
historicization; how they articulate it is through an ethnic semiosis.
      Thus a more universalizing critical approach such as Bakhtin’s can
be particularized by contemporary multiethnic concepts and applications.
If Bakhtin’s maxim is that the author is inevitably to be found at the
center of organization in his novel, where all levels intersect, how can a
reading of The Godfather be enhanced by opening Puzo’s ethnic encyclo-
pedia and reviewing the markers at his command and those that, in
effect, write him as well? Ethnic semiosis can complement other models
with an enriched description of speech acts and plot transactions that
recast The Godfather’s major dialogic confrontations as ethnically “per-
formed” within specific occasions, according to rules. To read The Godfa-
ther ethnically blind is to cast about for a more universal theoretical
criterion, which Bakhtin satisfies. To read The Godfather through ethnic
semiosis is to read partially through bella figura, an essentially unself-
conscious genre of performance that does not yield to a literary criticism
searching for characters’ privileged individual consciousness but one that
reveals the shape of narrative energies crucial to our understandings of
the novel and Godfather films.
      Part of the strategy of reading The Godfather ethnically is to counter
those readings with Puzo’s achievement in his critically acclaimed Fortu-
nate Pilgrim (1964). What aspects of The Fortunate Pilgrim stand over and
above The Godfather as in-depth explorations of ethnic passage in America
in a commitment to realism? The Fortunate Pilgrim’s powerful ethnic semio-
sis proves Puzo is writing through his “gifts,” not “below” them, and
creating an ethnic novel of power. By reading some key scenes in Pilgrim
against their possible counterpart scenes in The Godfather, we may note
the closing down, the non-nuanced structural and sensible bareness of
the blockbuster text. To explain the dialogic and ethnic power of The
Fortunate Pilgrim is to focus quarrels with The Godfather’s lack of literariness
on the one hand and to show other narrative roads taken by Puzo, other
choices made.
      A host of multiethnic strategies can make The Godfather resonate.
The work of critics such as Werner Sollors and William Boelhower, for
example, give us key concepts such as the difference between consent and
descent narratives in ethnic literature (Sollors) and the importance of
ethnically articulated type-scenes in American frame settings such as
family weddings and traditional family dinners in an ethnic semiosis
(Boelhower).1 Furthermore, the entire repertoire of Italianita, including
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble               109



the gestural politics and social scripts of bella figura do much to explain
in greater detail the verisimilitude that Puzo was striving for, a mimesis
generally unavailable to the larger fictional audience as well as to the
critical one without such specification. Thus chapters 3 and 4 together
provide a full introduction to The Godfather’s language as performance.
To grasp the ethnic semiosis of the novel is to be educated past high
critical estrangement from the popular ethnic novel to something like a
thick description of its aura. What appear to be the evasions practiced by
Puzo and characters when seen through Bakhtin’s categories can also be
called perfectly pitched examples of Italian American voice and gesture
when looked at as ethnic performance, no longer a segregated category
but one more fully dialogic with moral consequence. To find out through
ethnic analysis how power and authority are negotiated by Puzo does not
explain his equivocations just because we may find them more culture-
specific by casting them in a more dramatic light. Such would be another
critical fallacy to let Puzo and the Corleones off the hook. Yet the
contextualization provided by describing Puzo through the ethnic en-
semble is an essential complement to dialogics.


                          Ethnic Semiosis

       Puzo published his one really autobiographical essay “Choosing a
Dream” in The Godfather Papers (1972) at the pinnacle of his success after
the novel’s best-selling ride and the emormous acclaim of the first God-
father film. In “Choosing,” he admitted his great ambivalence about
Italianita and an ethnic American identity, his bemused view of his own
celebrity status, and his life-long infatuation with art. All his views were
rendered in a literary and cultural climate that had not yet begun to
codify and really celebrate multiethnic American fiction nor provide a
critical climate within which a novelist might see him- or herself or take
a stand. Given Puzo’s subsequent indifference right up to the end of his
life to scholars and critics conceptualizing his own ethnic writer’s career
or anyone else’s, it’s doubtful that his writing novels at a later juncture
during the critical sanctioning and establishment of multiethnic or “bor-
der” literature would have made any impression on him or his work.
Chapter 2 has chronicled Puzo’s long love affair with art, the ways in
which he believed his immersion in art might save his life and counter
his poverties, both real and imagined. His ethnic identity as Italian
American was encoded in overt and covert fashion in his novels for
decades. No ethnic criticism clearly explains Puzo’s work; however, we
note some of its key precepts before reading selections from The Godfather
and The Fortunate Pilgrim with the help of its corrective lenses.
       Boelhower’s Through a Glass Darkly: Ethnic Semiosis in American Lit-
erature (1987) remains the most provocative theorizing about the influence
110                               Chapter 4



and different forms that the ethnic subject can take in American fiction.
Boelhower argues that the ethnic sign is everywhere in American fiction
and that ethnic writing is American writing (3). He conceives of an “in-
clusive transcontextuality . . . whereby to act as one of two terms (assimi-
lation and Americanization versus pluralism and ethnification) . . . means
immediately to summon the other term” (33). To be Italian American in
America is to always contain within an action, utterance, or thought the
interpenetration of the answering reality, either one of ethnic origin or
American national environment. Both terms are fluid and ongoing, nei-
ther is inherently dominant. Habitare is the word Boelhower borrows
from Gaston Bachelard to embody the concept of “the spatial unfolding
of the proposition ‘I Am’ ” (43). Habitare is born of national origin and
geography and sites the clash and crisis of ethnic interaction. Boelhower’s
strongest oppositions within this unfolding are between the Native
Americans and their Puritan European antagonists; the Puritan internal
landscape was ruled by a literary-religious vision of a biblical new land
and frames Boelhower’s strongest intimation about the “Americans,” their
absolute dependence on a mapped and written narrative, whereas the
Native Americans inhabit the land itself without an allegorical script.
       Boelhower’s sustained clash of perceptual and configuring sensi-
bilities does not yield a “communicative exchange” as much as a juxta-
position of two opposing views of space, which can move out into
oppositions on views of history, self-hood, community, and citizenship.
The great European migration to America at the end of the nineteenth
century places Boelhower’s dynamic under reversed conditions from that
of the Puritans and Native Americans. Now the Puritans have their na-
tional script firmly in place, and their first foes, the Native Americans,
have “vanished” into convenient tales of “removal” and are praised in
nostalgia for their “naturalness.” Their literal threat as killer antagonists
contesting for real land has been absorbed into the American narrative
though they themselves have not assimilated. The habitare of the Sicilian
and southern Italian immigrants in 1900 is then both similar and dissimi-
lar to Boelhower’s earlier colonial model. They flee after centuries of
domination in a harsh and poor natural landscape where they are op-
pressed peasants, not mystical forest conservators. Illiterate, they possess
no national script nor facility in the new land’s language. They have no
civil traditions, preserve a fierce family identity, and fear all central gov-
ernments with their institutions of police and courts. The American habitare
that they confront is an abstract land of rights, privileges, and freedoms
underwriting a grid of mapped townships, constitutions, and bills of
rights, subdivided into powers of state, city, and town governments. Im-
migrants are always expected to live up to the ideal construction of citi-
zenship in this space, while the physical and demographic reality of the
United States is precisely the constant historical arrival of disparate im-
migrant groups with their own habitare.
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                111



       Thus the Italian or any immigrant advance into America is that of the
oppressed, moving into the new land without maps, from subjugation to
subjugation, from the bottom to the bottom. If the American Puritan colo-
nist said, “[T]his is where my boundaries are,” in a cognitive and histori-
cal-religious mapping of their interior-exterior landscapes, Boelhower
conceives the Native American saying “[T]his is where my body is” (56).
To enable themselves to reword their own narratives, the modern ethnic
immigrants must become the new Native Americans, assumed to be “van-
ishing” into the national narrative and its subscribers as part of the Ameri-
can covenant with new arrivals. In a substitution, they must give up body
for script, not as in aboriginal vanishing beyond both mapped territory
and consciousness but vanishing into the national pool in a somewhat
more complex and somber recasting of the melting pot. The question that
so many ethnic narratives pose to the national story becomes, what is the
relation of being doubly counted out (as peasants at home, as immigrants
abroad) to being “Chosen?” For Puzo’s Sicilian Americans in The Godfather
are recalcitrant and obstinate “Injuns” with no urge to become part of
America’s fashioned tale and are resolved to grimly live out their own
prior history within American borders and dispensations.
       Puzo is Neapolitan, and such are the subject characters in The For-
tunate Pilgrim. For The Godfather, Puzo chose to write about Sicilians, long
burdened with a rich and dark history within Italian culture itself.2 In-
deed, The Godfather’s dominion over Italian American signification in
American culture gave rise to the curious fact that after 1969, to the
average American popular culture consumer, Italian Americans are Sicil-
ians; they are represented by Mafia hoodlums and their enterprising
murderous families to the exclusion of any other complex network of
groups. If the Mafia and Sicily become convenient Others in American
culture, a colorful lawless peasant population of violence and repressed
passion within mainstream America, it appears that as literary or narra-
tive subjects, these very Southern Italians now function as American
southerners in the popular imagination, and Sicily perhaps becomes a
geographical annex akin to signifiers such as Alabama or Mississippi.
Sicily is symbolically akin to the American Deep South, a region tradi-
tionally scapegoated but also rendered earthier, more dramatic, and alive
in its melodramatic representation. In the popular fantasy, lives there are
more grotesque, poverty and illiteracy endemic, and fierce prejudices
give rise to clan warfare. In literary terms, the Sicilians are positively
Faulknerian in their mythic intransigence, patriarchal domination, and
tragic, unyielding sense of honor. Luigi Barzini has observed that Italy is
still somewhat of a pagan country, that religion spreads a thin veneer
over older customs (45), and that “Sicily is the schoolroom model of Italy
for beginners, with every Italian quality and defect magnified, exasper-
ated, and brightly colored” (252) and thus perfect for popular fiction
and melodrama.
112                              Chapter 4



       A cursory look at Sicilian history proves that no other national group
of early-twentieth-century American immigrants could possibly come from
as deep a feudal past nor have such suggestive multiple lines to an
American national script. Vito Andolini arrives at Ellis Island in 1901 and
takes the name of Corleone, his native town in Sicily. He comes at the
outset of the great Southern Italian migration to the United States. By
1924, 85 percent of the five million Italian immigrants arriving in the
United States were from the South, and of those, the vast number were
illiterate farm workers or laborers (Gambino 78, 114; Lopreato 103). Their
social relationships in the new world were likely to be based almost
entirely on kinship ties.3 Education was mistrusted and the organs of
government even more so. Sicily itself had been a colonized land, con-
tinually vulnerable to invasions from both Christian and Muslim North
African worlds. Over the centuries from the Phoenicians, Crusaders, and
Norsemen to the Habsburgs and Bourbons, all inhabitants of Europe’s
Mediterranean rim had their run at Sicily. Sicilians then are something
like rugged rural Americans of many backgrounds with drops of racial
and religious hybridizing. Such a historical reality might have yielded a
first millennial pluralism or melting pot, but no such institutions were in
store for Sicily, whose utter geographic vulnerability in the mid-
Mediterranean never allowed the island to flourish in any isolation or
idealism. The endless succession of governments in the major cities such
as Palermo and Messina often made little difference in the interior of the
island, which was seldom controlled by any legal or policing system (Smith
xv). Indeed, Puzo appropriates Corleone, a rugged and isolated hillside
town in the middle of empty western Sicily, the name of which becomes
as famous in American popular literature as the fictional Peyton Place.
       The Mafia itself is a very old institution in Sicily but most often
loosely confederated within different regions as late as the midnineteenth
century. The meanings of mafia are disparate, and while it has been used
by Sicilians to refer to criminal organizations, it also has meant “good,
“fine,” and “admirable” (Gambino 268). Such range in meaning is almost
inherently melodramatic in its potential for good versus evil within a
mafia context. Furthermore, in the traditional interpretation of mafia, its
criminal activity was only a means, never an end, because the chief object
was to gain power and respect, with wealth merely an instrument. How-
ever, Barzini notes it’s most likely that the trouble the Mafia defends one
from is almost always controlled by the Mafia itself, that “such a rough
and archaic form of justice” destroys all concepts of public virtue and
state cohesion (255, 275). Faith in public authority did not increase in
Sicily after Italian Unification in 1860 but actually decreased, and no
sense of social obligation existed among Sicilians (D. Smith 466).
       It is difficult to imagine an ethnic immigrant group more hostile
to all forms of the American civil contract and promise than the Sicil-
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 113



ians. To read The Godfather for American traces, for American influences
and thematics, is heavy labor. The Corleones move through their iso-
lated world according to their lights, with America remaining a deeply
mistrusted territory. Most of the characters with whom they interact in
the novel are also Sicilian in origin except for appointed outsiders (Tom
Hagen, Kay Adams, Jack Woltz, Jules Segal, Moe Greene). Thus it’s
crucial for readers to crack the code of Italian American social exchange.
To begin, almost all commentators on Italian life from sociologists to
historians remark on its performative aspects in speech and gesture.
Plain speaking without nuance is in itself a foreign language in Italy
and one greatly derided at most junctures in The Godfather as well. Bella
figura is the attention to form of presentation governing social situa-
tions and the code that expresses an individual’s public utterance and
social script (Nardini xiii; Gardaphe 20). Bella figura governs oral com-
munication and shapes its social pragmatics while providing its the-
atre. Such presentation crucially stresses “being impeccable before the
eyes of others” (Nardini 11), especially in public appearances where
indirectness and forms rule over frank exchange. To know bella figura
and observe its rules is to survive and prosper in The Godfather. For a
Corleone to become impetuous, imprudent, impatient, to “not get the
message,” is to place the family at considerable risk and its enemies in
real danger.
       Such indirection in language and its interpretation comprises a
“hidden meaning” not unlike the one in another semantic register pos-
ited by New Critical reading practices through veneration of Jamesian
maxims such as “the figure in the carpet,” the theme running through a
narrative that suddenly is made visible through informed reading. Here
the “figure” is kinetic and fluid, passing ephemerally from speaker to
speaker, determined by the social setting, the power relations, the aims
and goals of the participants, and, not least, by gender, race, class, and
ethnicity. It’s not just Italian and Italian American social presentation that
is governed by conventions and rules but rather all praxis, yet literary
criticism often reifies language itself at the expense of its setting and
intent. Our modernist masters of Imagism and verbal precision decanted
perhaps in Pound’s “petals on a wet, black bough,” or Williams’s red
wheelbarrow or Eliot’s great fear of words that crack, slide, and will not
hold their meanings still key elite readers to mistrust flourish and
overdetermined gestural communication. It’s too much altogether and
not taste-ful at all. Figural indirection and a hidden ethnic narrative are
not credited by elite literary criticism, which wants to elide a social situ-
ation as a mere surface phenomenon. However, in The Godfather, we must
learn to read a euphemism as strategic and significant, not “imprecise,”
“slack,” or “banal,” some of the code words used to discredit the lan-
guage of popular fiction.
114                              Chapter 4



                   Performing The Godfather


       I would like ultimately to revisit Genco in the hospital during Don
Corleone’s final stop on Connie’s wedding day to see if, armed with the
precepts of bella figura, we might contextualize Puzo’s equivocations as
verisimilar cultural performance. Before such a visit, I want to look at
other scenes in book 1 of The Godfather, which at times appears to be an
etiquette manual for bella figura in which the family conducts business,
feints and parries with an outside American world, marries off a daugh-
ter and loses a son (Michael) to exile in Sicily.
       The Godfather begins in a New York criminal courtroom where
Amerigo Bonasera, aspiring American, waits for sentence to be pro-
nounced against the two young Anglo men who have savagely beaten
his daughter. According to traditional Sicilian belief, such a civic environ-
ment of American law and order is precisely antithetical to any place
where Puzo’s Sicilian Americans can hope for justice. When the two men
receive a suspended sentence because of their “fine families” (10), Bonasera
knows “they have made fools of us” (11), and he must go to Don Corleone.
The novel takes its leave of the American justice system immediately and
plunges into the Corleone world where Bonasera is proven to be a Sicil-
ian who has lost all his knowledge of how forms must be observed and
ritualized in order to survive coherently. In short, he must be shorn of his
“Amerigo” status, and his reeducation is a lesson that is taught through
bella figura. In Bonasera’s long interview with Don Corleone, he and the
reader learn “how to read” the ethnic type-scene in its particular frame,
that of a powerlessness asking power for vengeance against an external
foe; Bonasera learns how to properly approach that court and judge.
       Bonasera commits errors in both judgment and lack of supplication.
He has gone to the police, believed in the courts, two decisions that
deeply offend Don Corleone; however, he allows Bonasera to whisper to
him his request, which is to kill the young men. When the Don replies,
“That I cannot do. You are being carried away,” Bonasera overturns all
the delicacy of negotiation when he says “loudly, clearly, ‘I will pay you
anything you ask.’ On hearing this, Hagen flinched, a nervous flick of his
head. Sonny Corleone folded his arms, smiled sardonically as he turned
from the window to watch the scene in the room for the first time” (31).
Hagen’s “flinch” establishes him as something like the bella figura par-
liamentarian for The Godfather, the one who knows and cites the Sicilian
Rules of Order in performance. As the outsider turned passionate insider,
Tom often corrects verbal conduct from Michael, Sonny, Jack Woltz, and
Kay Adams Corleone. Bonasera has “blasphemed” like Genco, speaking
of death without the proper euphemisms, calling into the open all the
violence that the family has at its command. He is “being carried away”
outside the proper forms. So egregious is his error that even the head-
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble               115



strong Sonny “sardonically” begins to listen intently to the performance.
Such cues that draw Hagen and Sonny into scrutiny of the unfolding
dialogue are strong hints to the reader that what is unfolding is both
significant and heavily ritualized. The real unfolding of the plot (signi-
fication of the Don’s power) is within the ethnic semiosis of their ex-
change, the aura that drives the scene.
      Since Bonasera has broken the respectful frame of supplicant to the
great Don on his daughter’s wedding day, Don Corleone’s “voice rang
like cold death.” Death is now in the room, and Bonasera will get a
verbal lesson in what happens when bella figura is replaced by brutta
figura. In the ensuing paragraph, the Don speaks through Bakhtinian
authoritative discourse beginning with the classic powerful opening “No.
Don’t speak.” He continues by using the pronoun you thirteen times to
characterize Bonasera’s “Americanization” and to distance himself from
this hybridized creature (“you do not ask with respect,” “you do not
offer me your friendship,” “you come into my home on the bridal day
of my daughter and you ask me to do a murder”). Language is so pow-
erful that “speaking death” is indeed bringing it into the home, espe-
cially obscene since the Corleone business is murder, and bella figura
strives mightily to erase that fact. To fight Bonasera’s breaking the frame,
the Don responds in kind, even to the point of “scornful mimicry.” To
prove how stately performance has gone awry, the Don answers in mock
performance, then modulates back into bella figura with “what have I
ever done to make you treat me so disrespectfully?” (31). Bonasera’s
answer is a concise list of American “errors”—“America has been good
to me. I wanted to be a good citizen. I wanted my child to be an Ameri-
can” (32)—that comprise good luck, civic duty, and assimilation, but
such a profession of faith in the new land only raises the stakes as the
Don in “cruel and contemptuous irony” rips his naive notions and then
parodically tells him to forgive, to put away his un-American madness,
for “life is full of misfortunes.”
      Bonasera’s final desperate cry is “How much shall I pay you?” and
the Don’s decision is not further anger in mock dialogue but the “dis-
missal” one might give to an uncomprehending child. There’s no way to
bring Bonasera back within the forms the occasion demands. In another
situation or set of circumstances, the feeling “but I cannot reason with
this man” might bring death in The Godfather and often does. Here the
Don wearily repeats the litany of “you” on the theme of “if you had
come to me” your enemies “would fear you” (33). Finally Bonasera suc-
cumbs, bows his head, and proffers the correct ritualized response: “Be
my friend. I accept.” With verbal order restored at last after Bonasera’s
inchoate dismissal of the forms, the Don may conclude the interview
with the famous words, “Some day, and that day may never come, I
will call upon you to do me a service in return. Until that day, consider
this justice a gift from my wife, your daughter’s godmother” (33). The
116                              Chapter 4



Don has placed a premium on bringing Bonasera back within the ethnic
world of speech forms after the failure of the petitioner’s direct “Ameri-
can” approach.
       Such a scene almost needs its visual recreation for full effect, which
is why the Godfather films are so expressive of bella figura when the printed
page may not as successfully convey the ethnically inflected transaction.4
Coppola is crucially aware of the spatial positioning of Corleone power.
The continuing image of the Godfather’s chair threads its way through
his Godfather trilogy. Beginning with the Don’s greeting the wedding day
guests in his darkened home office, the chair takes on grave significance:
who will fill it after the Don is gone? Sonny dies violently, Fredo is
incompetent, Michael ascends to the chair, and Coppola takes care to
photograph him carefully from below as he spreads his arms out to cover
the chair in Godfather II. Al Pacino as Michael is a compact young man,
yet the camera angles make him massive in that chair where by the end
of Godfather I he receives his subjects. The second film opens with the
shot of the Don’s empty chair, as if to stress the effort Michael must make
to hold together the family’s power in light of changing circumstances.
The film concludes with Michael behind the darkened glass of his Tahoe
window as Fredo is killed in the boat by Al Neri. Finally, in Godfather III,
the last image of an aged, shrunken Michael is of him toppling off a bare
chair into the Sicilian dust, having been stunned into catatonic old age by
the murder of his daughter.
       While Don Corleone must shift back and forth between correct form
and his exasperation at form’s breakdown, for an outsider such as Kay
Adams, the Corleone environment is truly mysterious. As an emissary
from nonethnic America, Kay’s education in bella figura is of the longest
standing in the novel. She begins by thinking her driver-escorts to her
New York hotel (Clemenza and Paulie Gatto) were “wildly exotic. Their
speech was movie Brooklynese and they treated her with exaggerated
courtesy” (48). Kay begins as no more than a naive reader of the Family.
She ends with the deepest knowledge as the woman prisoner in their
myth. Jack Woltz, the Jewish American Hollywood movie producer (to
be discussed at length in chapter 5) represents a different sort of “God-
father reader.” He comes replete with his own power that is not family
based but backed by the American government and system: he counts J.
Edgar Hoover as a personal friend. When Tom Hagen goes to California
to persuade Woltz to give Johnny Fontane a major role in an upcoming
film, he and Woltz inhabit different worlds of dialogue. Woltz explodes
in threats, making “his face a mask of anger,” while Hagen “listened
patiently.” “Never make a threat,” Hagen intones to himself, “never get
angry.” “The word ‘reason’ sounded so much better in Italian, rajunah
[italics Puzo], to rejoin” (57). Puzo attempts to educate his readers to the
full cultural meaning in the Italian language word choice. In this context,
the Irish American adopted Italian American son goes back into the lists
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                117



with the Jewish American movie mogul. He dangles possible financing
of Woltz’s film to give Woltz a graceful retreat into self-interest in order
to justify a contract for Johnny. Woltz says “patronizingly,” “this picture
is budgeted at five million.” Real money, like real death, is always in bad
form within the Corleone speech acts, but Woltz presses his error, “what
will it cost me to have that labor trouble cleared up? In cash. Right now?”
(61). Hagen chooses his reply carefully. Since Woltz has broken through
the delicate indirection of Corleone aid, Hagen says, “You are deliber-
ately misunderstanding me. You are trying to make me an accomplice to
extortion. Mr. Corleone promises only to speak in your favor on this
labor trouble as a matter of friendship in return for your speaking on
behalf of his client. A friendly exchange of influence, nothing more” (61).
       Woltz calls this “the Mafia style. . . . All olive oil and sweet talk
when what you’re really doing is making threats” (62). However, as on
the mark this statement is, Woltz as a critic of bella figura loses reader
support when he continues with a harangue of sexual jealousy against
Johnny Fontane who stole his starlet girlfriend. Woltz ends with his
embarrassing admission that “a man in my position . . . can’t afford to
look ridiculous” (62). Like Johnny himself, Woltz is letting sex get in the
way of business, and Hagen knows “in the Corleones’ world, the physi-
cal beauty, the sexual power of women, carried not the slightest weight
in worldly matters” (62). The interview collapses. Woltz calls the Corleones
thugs; Hagen reminds him that Johnny is a godson; Woltz threatens to
use influence at the White House. Hagen concludes much as Don Corleone
had with Bonasera that “the guy was taking his words at their sentimen-
tal face value. He was not getting the message” (63).
       The first seventy pages of The Godfather are obsessively about how
to read the world of the Godfather, how to understand the Corleone
initiatives, and what they care about but, most important, how they go
about protecting and negotiating what they called “Cosa Nostra.” This
world is relentlessly made up of indirect speech forms in specific con-
texts. Boelhower suggests that ethnicity is the practice of “digging up
cultural origins,” a “way of staying behind,” of “rediscovering place”
(64). In the case of speech forms in The Godfather, such radical tracks cross
the alignment of rhetoric and intent, with the map held by the Sicilian
Americans. They force their more Americanized counterparts into these
speech forms; judge them wanting in delicacy, morality, tact, strength;
and conclude that they should lose their business, their racehorse, their
lives. Such is the power of bella figura in The Godfather’s opening chapters
that all characters, Sicilian and American, are reinvented through com-
prehension or miscomprehension of the language performance. As a rule-
bound primer of the language and forms that cohere in the reasons and
philosophy behind the carnage to come, The Godfather’s opening is as
concise and meticulously presented as that in any Italian American fic-
tion generally called its better.5
118                                Chapter 4



                            Michael’s Gaze


       Without question the Godfather films endorse the monolithic power
so tightly constructed through bella figura and its forms. Yet the novel
itself, a looser vehicle with conflicting impulses on Puzo’s part (family
melodrama, Hollywood novel, Las Vegas novel, Sicilian historical ro-
mance), breaks open bella figura from the inside at junctures where the
Corleones argue and appraise each other from very different vantage
points within the family. When they are off duty or not enlisted in a war,
how do they see themselves and their rituals? Boelhower writes that
ethnic semiotics is “nothing more or less than the interpretive gaze of the
subject whose strategy of seeing is determined by the very ethno-symbolic
space of the possible world he inhabits” (86). In looking at Michael
Corleone’s view of his own family habitare, we can see how he brings a
hybridized perspective to Italianita.
       Michael’s ethnic passage in The Godfather is a complicated one. When
the novel opens, he’s the decorated war hero fresh from a semester at
Dartmouth, bringing his New England girlfriend to a family wedding. We
see no real internal battle in Michael, who has no reveries or impulses to
break away from family into America. The reader is presented with
Michael’s heroic status as a given at the outset. Kay may have the presi-
dential name of Adams, but Michael’s war feats are presented with more
than a little hint at John F. Kennedy and PT 109, an Irish American son
with a true American father and godfather who wants to prove his cour-
age equal to that of an older son and brother. To Sonny and the Don’s
surprise, Michael “enlisted and fought over the Pacific Ocean. He became
a Captain and won medals. In 1944 his picture was printed in Life maga-
zine with a photo layout of his deeds” (17). When Michael brings Kay to
Connie’s wedding, he’s outside the ethnic scene, floating between his fam-
ily and America. He’s much more open and relaxed with her than he ever
will be again. In telling her about Luca Brasi, his inflections and interior
thoughts are reckless in light of bella figura: “[T]he hell with it, he thought.
He said straight out . . .” (24). After regaling Kay with Luca’s body count
in the “famous olive oil war,” “He smiled as if it were a joke” (24). Michael
begins as a chronicler of local color, a commentator on the family. He tells
of the Don’s “reasoning” with a band leader to allow Johnny Fontane to
be released from a personal services contract; the negotiations came down
to “his signature or his brains . . . on that document” (42–43). Puzo stresses
not so much the tale but its telling: Michael “told her. He told her without
being funny. He told it without pride. He told her without any sort of
explanation” (42). Michael is not invested, not Sicilian, not in performance.
He could be a generic Godfather reader recalling a favorite anecdote.
       On the day Vito Corleone is shot by Sollozzo, Michael and Kay
make love in a New York hotel and then go to see Carousel, “and its
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                119



sentimental story of a braggart thief made them smile at each other with
amusement” (78). Puzo cites the American popular culture’s most re-
nowned melting pot entertainment, the American musical with its class,
racial, and ethnic lines always highlighted, then recontained in moral
statements.6 More important, Michael and Kay share the cinematic refer-
ential joke to his family and knowledge of its reputation. Coming out of
the play, Kay spots the screaming newspaper headline: VITO CORLEONE
SHOT. ALLEGED RACKET CHIEF CRITICALLY WOUNDED (79), and
Michael’s world is “destined” to change more radically than his enlist-
ment after Pearl Harbor. Yet the change is not a metamorphosis but a
gradual “consent” to affirm his “descent.” He begins by becoming the
“go-fer” in the Corleone compound as Sonny tries to shield him from the
violence to come, according to the Don’s wishes. Michael is not to be-
come part of the family business, which in the novel’s logic means he
must remain outside the ethnic frame as well. Sonny says, “You hang
around me, Mike, you’re gonna hear things you don’t wanta hear” (92),
again stressing the truth in language, the murderous orders about to be
given. To break through Sonny’s prohibitions, Michael stands up and
yells, “ ‘You lousy bastard, he’s my father. I’m not supposed to help
him? . . . Stop treating me like a kid brother. I was in the war. I got shot,
remember? I killed some Japs. What the hell do you think I’ll do when
you knock somebody off? Faint?’ ” (92–93). Michael’s speech here con-
tains several inflections: the chosen younger son, the American war vet-
eran, the killer “for strangers” who now demands his manhood. He claims
fitness for duty in the family war by what he has done in the American
war, and he does so in an American exchange, equal to equal, no equivo-
cation of embellishment, no delicacy of bella figura. What characterizes
Michael’s exchanges with Sonny and Tom Hagen, indeed with and among
all the male Corleone conspirators and members of war councils, is the
absolute dropping of masks when alone together, the jettisoning of bella
figura. Even Sonny can enter into the carnivalization of the old Don when
he’s not present: “his voice held a faint trace of Italian accent. He was
consciously mocking his father just to kid around” (131).
      However, Michael remains outside the crisis emotionally, still iden-
tifying with Kay and doing bemused commentary on the family. When
she asks if she can go with him to visit the Don in the hospital, he parries
with a mock Daily News headline: “Girl from old Yankee family mixed up
with son of big Mafia chief. How would your parents like that?” (113);
Kay responds that her parents never read the Daily News. This exchange
proves Michael is still in secondary sources, configuring the family leg-
end from the outside as something he consumes rather than is consumed
by. Kay also states her distance from the events by class commentary on
reading tabloids, a Bourdieuian marker, to be sure, and one that, taken
together with Michael’s parody headline, buffers them from the business
of this particular family business. Michael then attends a family council
120                              Chapter 4



to discuss the status of the war in which all evidence of bella figura is
completely down, all rhetorical flourish is missing from the dialogue of
the insiders for themselves. Each sentence begins declaratively: “Hagen
said quietly,” “Sonny muttered,” “Clemenza said slowly,” “Sonny turned
to Tessio” (116). As if finally remembering to ethnically mark the scene,
Puzo has a button man bring a bowl of spaghetti and some wine. Sud-
denly Michael appears to scrutinize behavior: “They ate as they talked.
Michael watched in amazement. He didn’t eat and neither did Tom, but
Sonny, Clemenza and Tessio dug in, mopping up sauce with crusts of
bread. It was almost comical” (117). What to make of such nervous and
awkward ethnic intervention? Puzo strains to keep Michael as commen-
tator, strains too to drop an ethnic type-scene in the midst of a war
council. His instincts tell him to find an intending ethnic subject to filter
his gaze. The conspirators can’t stop long enough to be ethnic. Michael
with nothing to do can glimpse the eating, the taste-full afterthought to
a Mafia meeting. As Boelhower says, the ethnic sign is often intermittent
and weak (85), and Michael before he “makes his bones” functions more
as an outsider to the ethnic world of the Corleones, reporting like an
anthropologist on the local customs, this time as an informed reader of
The Godfather. After his jaw is shattered by McCluskey outside the hos-
pital, he loses his viewpoint, privilege, and American status. He’s just
another Corleone hood in the eyes of the police. He has become educated
to his family role. Sonny is the reader’s avatar when he explodes at
Michael: “I’ve been sitting here waiting for the last three days, ever since
the old man got shot, waiting for you to crack out of that Ivy League,
war hero, bullshit character you’ve been wearing. I’ve been waiting for
you to become my right arm so we can kill those fucks that are trying to
destroy our father and our Family” (134).7
      Sonny provides the signature of the raw primal family imperative,
clanlike in its simplicity; it’s coupled with the superhero break-out from
what appears to Sonny as improbable working-class spokesman as silly,
irrelevant American signifiers of education and heroism. When Michael
convinces Sonny and Tom to let him avenge the Don, Hagen takes an-
other tack and replies that he shouldn’t let the broken jaw influence him,
that it was business, not personal. Michael responds, “It’s all personal,
every bit of business. Every piece of shit every man has to eat every day
of his life is personal” (146). Michael now articulates a very different line
from that of his bemused spectator at the family window. He is male,
visceral, individual, a class-bound action hero speaking for every op-
pressed man anywhere, refusing to be downtrodden.8 Men must take
things personally; there is no other recourse. Michael notes that his father
took his going into the Marines personally. Speaking with all masks down,
he asks Tom outright, “how many men do you figure the Don killed or
had killed?” (146). Hagen tries to wrest control of the careening narrative
back from the angry, converted American hero.9 In shock, he restores the
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble               121



proper discourse: “I’ll tell you one thing you didn’t learn from him:
talking the way you’re talking now. There are things that have to be done
and you do them and you never talk about them. You don’t try to justify
them. They can’t be justified. You just do them. Then you forget it” (146–
47). Michael is “talking” as an action hero, a loose-lipped champion of
the underdog. Hagen favors silence, a man doing what he has to do, with
no attempt at moral justification, and no memory. Michael now knows
massive resentment; he has become a victim. Hagen tells him direct talk
is unbecoming, not in line with Sicilian omerta. The two “brothers” provide
the simplest rendition of The Godfather’s ethic of conduct. Consider the
scene before the reader in its ethnic hybridity: a Sicilian American war
hero’s son turned family avenger is upbraided by an Irish Corleone adopted
son for not following the correct forms of Italianita. In essence, Tom has
assimilated completely to becoming a Corleone, a “country” that he has
embraced. All is written under the sign of a familiar popular fiction
epiphany: that the hero is forced to go bad because of a wrong so intoler-
able that it would be unmanly not to take matters into his own hands.
      Michael’s conversion shows how Puzo neatly adjusts his time peri-
ods to counterpoint a world at war with the Corleone world at war. As
peace breaks out over the globe in 1945, Michael’s retaliatory killing of
Sollozzo and McCluskey ushers in a new era of carnage for the Corleones.
The last lines of book 1 are “The Five Families War of 1946 had begun”
(153). This war sends Michael back overseas in exile, this time to the Eu-
ropean theater (Sicily) to truly learn his origins. His second “wartime ser-
vice,” far from cementing his American identity as in the popular melting
pot story for millions of American men in World War II, is to insert him
firmly back into the Sicilian family cycle of violence in the name of “rea-
son.” Puzo un-Americanizes him in a reverse of assimilation or integration
of ethnic and American identities. In 1946, after murdering two civilians,
the Life magazine war hero is walking the barren Sicilian hills with his
bodyguards. The American national story of ethnic consent has been ar-
rested and reversed in Puzo’s deft diachronic play with destinies.


                   The Godfather ’s Silences

      In the past several decades, America has become introduced to the
concept of omerta or silence through immersion in Mafia narratives. Omerta
is a characteristic of Southern Italian culture and a cornerstone of pow-
erful male authority in negotiation where euphemism is as close to rev-
elation as a speaker gets and a host of aphorisms countenance public
silence.10 Often Don Corleone’s power is most terrifyingly demonstrated
by his reticence, by his refusal to comment or by forcing his partner in
dialogue to bow to the inevitable rightness of his aims. Silence can
be performed as it makes other speakers change their responses and
122                               Chapter 4



subsequent actions. Omerta is most strongly demonstrated by the trans-
gression against it. For example, when an overeager Sonny lets Solozzo
know he’s interested in potential drug business, the Don tells him to
“never let anyone outside the family know what you’re thinking” (75).
Sonny’s eagerness sends the message that he, the family heir, can be
approached by other families and leads directly to the Don’s shooting,
which catalyzes the family crisis.
      This centuries-old Italian code of omerta governing what can or
cannot be said according to situation is a male constant that leads to an
extraordinary if isolated power. It has lines to several literary and cul-
tural definitions of silence in our time. For example, silence can be an
ethnic sign, a narrative strategy, or a modernist signature of the exhaus-
tion and debasement of language. Don Corleone repeatedly reserves
comment or silences his opponents in implied threat. Popular fiction in
general operates on a principle of silence, a monologue of unbroken,
configurational, plot-oriented action without the interstices of reflection
and ironic commentary. Popular fiction is silent on questions that go
beyond its boundaries and is generally content to reproduce a fictional
form of common sense (Bromley in Ashley 154), though the subjects of
the fiction are generally the subjects that the culture is deeply interested
in (desire, money, morality, power, family). The popular dialogues about
these subjects often appear the very antithesis of silence, indeed become
a cacophony of voices. The mock-formality in which The Godfather un-
folds is an anomaly and tends to further mask the philosophical and
moral chaos of the novel. The Godfather unites both the ethnic silence of
the Italian American and the narrative silence of the popular form. The
Italian ethnic speech acts through the characters’ internal discipline, which
is wary of cultural dissent and repercussion, while the popular narrative
unfolds through a welter of censoring breaks: need to reach the widest
audience, sensationalism, conventional wisdom on serious moral ques-
tions, authorial failure to render those questions in depth.
      Silence is also a certified elite literature trope expressing an author’s
thoughts on both personal and historical despair. In Melville’s Pierre (1852),
his hero, caught in a spiraling parody of popular romance’s grotesque
familial distortions, says of virtue, “If on that point the gods are dumb,
shall a pygmy speak?” (321). Hemingway’s classic dictum in The Sun
Also Rises (1926) is Jake Barnes’s “You’ll lose it if you talk about it,” a
holding in of one’s painfully constructed self against trauma and break-
down. In A Farewell to Arms (1929), Hemingway’s further commentary on
the historical justification of silence is that after World War I “there were
many words that you could not stand to hear and finally only the names
of places had dignity”; one should only name the sites of battles, “the
names of the regiments and the dates” for “abstract words such as glory,
honor, courage, or hallow were obscene” (185). The charnel house of the
Holocaust has led some contemporary writers to posit silence as perhaps
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 123



the only acceptable response to the aboriginal catastrophe about which
God appears to be silent. Narrative minimalists from Samuel Beckett
through Don DeLillo reinforce language’s terminal points in a philo-
sophical commitment to Wittgenstein whom DeLillo lauds in End Zone as
championing silence about what cannot be said: “Two parts to that man’s
work. What is written. What is not written. The man himself seemed to
favor the second part” (233).
      What links the Italian American ethnic silence to the silence of
modernism in modernity is the need for control and authority, a deeply
masculine need exhibited best through a male dominant narration, which,
of course, suffuses The Godfather. Thus silence is observed and performed
by Puzo’s Sicilian-Americans in The Godfather but is not credited there by
elite literary criticism, which wants to privilege silence only when it is
metacommentary on language and history, not when it is an ethnically
based custom of language and gesture. The mimetic representation of
silence in hundreds of pages in Puzo novels carries not so much interest
for critics as that expressed in one Beckett title: The Unnamable. DeLillo,
Italian American fiction’s “outed” major novelist after Underworld (1997),
responded in a 1982 interviewer to the question “Why do reference books
give only your date of birth and the publication dates of your books?”
He answered, “Silence, exile, cunning and so on. It’s my nature to keep
quiet about most things” (Interview 20). Not only did DeLillo get away
with naturalizing his silence, but he pitched the literati the famous Joycean
phrase from A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man where Stephen Dedalus
states he will fly by his own nets of religion, family, and country in what
becomes recognized as high modernist evasive action. Until quite re-
cently, interviewers would query DeLillo on Wittgenstein, not on his
ethnic-linguistic heritage. He had passed into the assimilated canonical
discourse of postmodernism, a more legitimate family business. In light
of the study of a best-selling author such as Puzo, what’s key in DeLillo’s
response is that he signifies omerta in cross-ethnic and elite literary lan-
guage, but he also appropriates cunning, after destiny, the most revealing
and pervasive word in Puzo’s fiction that takes us close to the locus and
conception of his power as a writer. Puzo never gets artistic credit for the
creation of his silences and cunning, which are read as only the ethnic
framing of a best-selling author. Popular fiction study never makes the
text’s language the subject of investigation because it does not render
that language as complex or allusive. Popular fiction never dictates to its
critics its own agendas, merely its empirical constructs, which critics then
turn on with alacrity as under-imagined, over-determined, and ideologi-
cally obtuse.
      Yet the popular, elite, and ethnic categories of silence share traces in
many ways. Puzo attempted to be a Hemingway with his tough guy
World War II veterans in The Dark Arena. Hemingway’s minimalist style
became a fundamental narrative voice in popular genres such as the
124                              Chapter 4



Western and detective story, and Puzo’s Corleones are thus familiar to
readers from these other generic contexts. The largest popular frame for
silence in the contemporary reading climate is that of “male silence” in
general, an inability or refusal to “get in touch with feelings,” a refusal
to share emotions with others, specifically women. Silence is reinforced
as male and negative. Small wonder that it can also be powerfully and
conservatively reinvented simply as male power and thus be part of
traditional literature’s arsenal against “feeling” and emotion, which are
relegated in another corner of the popular to female sentimentalism and
always pejorative.
       Upon his return from Sicily, Michael and Kay have an extended
dialogue after sex in which Puzo dramatizes omerta from several view-
points. Michael has been secreted in Sicily after his killing of McCluskey
and Sollozzo. During his time there he married Apollonia and watched
her die in a revenge assassination. Kay chides him that he could have
written her, that she “would have practiced the New England omerta.
Yankees are pretty closemouthed too, you know” (360). Puzo hybridizes
the ethnic sign as he always does with Kay, an Adams from New En-
gland. Yet Michael will lie repeatedly to her; the surface talk that he
constructs always maintains a barrier to real intimacy. When Kay tells
him, “I never believed you killed those two men. . . . I never believed it
in my heart,” Michael answers, “It doesn’t matter whether I did or not”
(361). Each character speaks from a different genre. Kay in sentimental
romance won’t believe her man capable of such an act; Michael in the
strictly segmented world controlled by omerta believes that women live
in separate spheres, that his status as a murderer is not relevant to their
life together. When Kay presses her question, she then argues herself out
of it through romance language, that what she really cannot accept was
that Mike didn’t call her when he got back home. When Mike’s cigarette
ashes fall on her bare back, she attempts lame humor from his world,
“stop torturing me, I won’t talk,” but Michael is not amused. He tells her
that when he saw her tonight, he was glad: “[I]s that what you mean by
love?” (360–61). Suddenly Michael is a Hemingway existentialist in the
vein of “what’s good is what I feel good after.”
       This bedroom banter is tepid by any dramatic standard, popular or
elite, but the clash between the eager heroine and her stony hero contin-
ues as she tests his resolve to keep silent, and he replies in phrases such
as “I can’t tell you about anything that happened”; “I won’t be telling
you anything about my business”; “[Y]ou won’t be my partner in life, as
I think they say . . . that can’t be.” Kay lamely guesses that she’s married
a monster. They make small jokes about his blasted face and drippy nose.
He gives her the All-American speech about joining the general Ameri-
can family in the future. He tells her that, like his mother and father, if
she stays with him and makes him her first loyalty for forty years, “after
you do that maybe I’ll tell you a few things you really don’t want to
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble               125



hear” (364). Michael concludes with a speech he calls a “final explana-
tion” that makes the Don into something like an ethnic Ayn Rand figure:
“He doesn’t accept the rules of the society we live in because those rules
would have condemned him to a life not suitable to a man like himself,
a man of extraordinary force and character” (365). When Kay calls him
on the ethics of that remark, asking what if everyone felt the same way,
Michael pulls back, grins, and says, “I’m just telling you what my father
believes” (365).11 In their long exchange, Kay speaks for love, openness,
trust, and American pluralism. Michael tacks between complete silence,
half-truths, general explanations, and family justification. In no case is
the dialogue internally persuasive, and, as a producer of authoritative
discourse, Michael is a second-hand agent for his father. On the lovers’
bed, omerta meets romance, and as Michael finally says, “This is really
getting us no place. But maybe I’m just one of those old-fashioned con-
servatives they grow up in your hometown. I take care of myself, indi-
vidual. Governments don’t do much for their people. . . . All I can say is
that I have to help my father. I have to be on his side” (366).
       The Sicilian American returned from his Old World hideout justi-
fies his life and that of his father. Although America is warily held at bay
through bribes and influence, Michael expresses a hard American fact
that individualism is the American religion and a rueful but hard Sicilian
fact that governments are useless. He seals his case with the universal
justification that his father needs him, that family trumps any national or
ethnic sign.12 Though Puzo’s sentiments are conventional, their scope is
very large. Michael and Kay are speaking about nothing less than Ameri-
can private and public trust, within the home and within the society.
That Michael is wrong and Kay ultimately submissive does not under-
mine the relevance of their dialogue. That Puzo, an author rightly scorned
for his often vulgar and mythical attempts to write about sex and women,
could have the patience to inscribe such a dialogue even simplistically
tells us that some portion of his more androgynous view remains from
The Fortunate Pilgrim.


                          Genco Revisited

       Armed with the elements of bella figura and omerta, the reader can
return to Genco’s entreaties to Don Corleone in a broader frame that
allows an enhanced appreciation for what the two old confederates are
signifying in their dramatic interview. It’s easy to read past the opening
section of Genco’s deathbed scene. A young “exasperated” Dr. Kennedy
leaves Genco’s room, “serious-faced and with the air of one born to
command, that is to say, the air of one who has been immensely rich all
his life” (45).13 To him, the crowd of Corleones and Abbandandos waiting
outside the dying man’s door are undifferentiated, even Don Corleone,
126                              Chapter 4



“the short heavy man in an awkwardly fitted tuxedo” who informs the
doctor that “we will take up the burden. . . . We will close his eyes. We
will bury him and weep at his funeral and afterwards we will watch over
his wife and daughters.” At this moment, Genco’s wife weeps bitterly,
but the Don has accomplished his role in public performance. He has
told her the truth in proper mourning language and established his re-
sponsibility. All Dr. Kennedy can do is shrug: “it was impossible to ex-
plain to these peasants. At the same time he recognized the crude justice
in the man’s remarks. His role was over.” Puzo crosses the ethnic perfor-
mance with the Anglo scrutiny. To the doctor, the Don is an older man
with a melodramatic set of flourishes. He doesn’t understand the under-
lying gravitas of the Don’s role nor its production in bella figura, yet even
he notes the “peasant’s” “crude justice” in the face of death. Then he
turns and walks away, “his white coat flapping” (46), medicine’s signa-
ture uniform as is the Don’s wedding day tuxedo. The modern world of
medical science and efficiency, often referenced by Puzo in The Fortunate
Pilgrim as well as The Godfather, has for a brief moment looked back at the
ethnic Corleones and has collided with deathbed ritual, the ethnic type-
scene here prefaced by the antiseptic gaze of Dr. Kennedy.
       Once Dr. Kennedy cedes the body of Genco over to the families, the
Don is in his element. When Genco asks to be saved in the several urgent
entreaties previously discussed, the Don’s final recourse to calling it
“blasphemy” may also be seen as Genco’s unwillingness to go through
the script of bella figura, which inherently will conceal the murderers’ true
relation to each other. To tell Genco to “resign” himself is to admonish
him not only to prepare himself for death but to get back in the ethnic
social script. The slippage described in the scene between the natural and
the historical, between authoritative and internally persuasive language,
may also be seen as the slippage between bella figura and brutta figura, a
transgression of an ethnically specific performance act. Genco who wishes
to historicize becomes an aesthetically ugly (brutta figura) dying body. To
“speak death” is literally to break confidence with performative codes,
with all that is known to be meaning. To say, as I did in chapter 3 that
after the Don’s interview with Genco, Puzo closes down the affirmation
of Don Corleone as a murderer is to say, in effect, that the rules of bella
figura, briefly transgressed, have been restored as the novel’s operative
rhetorical mode. Because both participants in this stylization must agree
to its enacting, The Godfather’s narrative logic makes it extraordinarily
difficult for a character to obtain any more self-knowledge than that
yielded by the speech act itself. Bella figura will not signify to a literary
criticism searching for self-scrutiny or a privileged individual conscious-
ness, the hallmarks of elite fiction. Characters must maintain their roles
as, for example, in slave narrative or in women’s narrative in which the
protagonist mimes the dominant discourse to appease the master or man
while retaining some residue of personal control.14
                    The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 127



       The reader of popular fiction most often takes the melodramatic
presentation of a scene such as that at Genco’s deathbed as “true” and
“powerful,” that Puzo’s concluding “as if the Don could truly snatch the
life of Genco Abbandando back from that most foul and criminal traitor
to man” (48) is demonstrably the case. Deathbeds famously yield “deep”
thoughts, and we obviously stand in awe of death’s power. Yet Puzo’s
benediction in authorial voice could be seen as a weaker signal broad-
casting bella figura without an antagonist, popular wisdom in extremis.
Puzo commented in The Godfather Papers that most readers and critics
missed the “casual irony” in his novel, that he really was “on the side of
the good guys,” and that his work was more moral than had been sus-
pected (70). “Casual irony” does not appear as a rhetorical category from
Aristotle through Wayne Booth, as far as I know. It’s difficult in the midst
of the disorder in which ideas are presented in The Godfather to believe
that misread “casual irony” is anything more than bella figura not being
recognized by the critical and general readers. Bella figura is verbal indi-
rection of a specific sort, and Puzo perhaps intuits that readers miss it
because they don’t read for euphemisms in performance by dint of aca-
demic training or lack of ethnic background or both. A cornerstone of
bella figura is dual participation. Speakers must be in cahoots, or the
speaker and listener must interpret the presentation in a certain situa-
tion. The feigned ignorance on a surface level that irony presupposes is
always replaced by a shared knowledge of irony’s trope on another level.
“Casual” well describes the studied outcome of a bella figura; a
“sprezzatura” or studied carelessness may be the result (Nardini 24), a
situation in which the Don and Genco, Sonny, or Michael want to show
little interest or strain, to make performance look accidental or random
with no agenda when, in fact, it is the very theatre for the conducting of
family as business, business as family. To divine the level of indirection
in a conventional modernist text would be to ascertain the tenor of its
irony. However, when ethnic criticism is the critical tool, bella figura and
omerta, tools of historical and social survival in centuries past, have to be
privileged as well. They coexist in New World settings with the plain
speaking and open speech of imagined American individualists. At this
point in critical debate, elite literary silences have cultural capital, whereas
the silences in ethnic performance do not. The American ethnic novel is
most often read in a predominantly nonethnic specific speech commu-
nity where a general misreading of its inflected performance is the norm.


       The Fortunate Pilgrim: Elite Ethnic Fiction

     The Godfather in which Puzo said he wrote “below his gifts” was
published only five years after The Fortunate Pilgrim, his well-received
ethnic novel that resolutely stayed within the ethnic ensemble to chronicle
128                              Chapter 4



the family of Lucia Santa Angeluzzi-Corbo on the Lower East Side of
New York City. The Fortunate Pilgrim is by acclimation a fine achieve-
ment; Boelhower thinks Puzo’s work meritorious enough to place it in a
hypothetical curriculum for a course on novels of ethnic pragmatics along
with Huckleberry Finn, Light in August, My Antonia, Invisible Man, and
Henry Roth’s Call It Sleep (36). Such a listing would finally achieve Puzo’s
dream of inclusion in a canon with American classic writers. What makes
The Fortunate Pilgrim a critic’s choice over the omnipresent and world
famous The Godfather? One answer might be found in an estimate of
Puzo’s handling of a scene that has real reference to the Genco–Don
Corleone interview in The Godfather.
      Lucia Santa’s husband, Frank Corbo, is in the throes of a spiritual
and emotional breakdown that is sapping his will to live. He becomes
involved with Colucci, an Italian Protestant evangelical whom he met at
work. Lucia Santa isn’t scandalized because Colucci isn’t Catholic; in-
deed, she has very little use for religion. When Colucci comes to her
home with three other men, they ring themselves around Frank’s bed
like “disciples,” and Frank accuses them of falsity: “You told me there
was never any need for doctors, that God decides, man believes. Now
you are false. You are Judas” (The Fortunate Pilgrim 104). Colucci’s reac-
tion is the extreme opposite of the Don’s in Genco’s deathbed scene:

      Mr. Colucci was stunned. He sat down on the bed and took
      Frank Corbo’s hand in his. He said, “My brother, listen to me,
      I believe. But when I see your wife and children to be left so,
      my faith wavers. Even mine. I cannot make my faith your
      destruction. You are ill. You have these headaches. You suffer.
      Dear brother, you do not believe. You say God has called you
      and you say you are dead. You blaspheme. Live now. Suffer a
      little longer. God will have mercy on you at Armageddon.
      Rise now and come to my home for supper. Then we will go
      to chapel and pray together for your deliverance. (104–05)

      Colucci charges his supplicant to live, not resign himself to death,
to have faith and seek a doctor’s care. The blasphemy is that Frank
speaks death, and Colucci can’t believe it. Puzo has him exhibit the self-
knowledge to reference the cariacature of the parable of Christ and the
true believer. Colucci assures Lucia Santa that Frank will be home at nine
that night and that she should have the doctor there. Colucci will come
and offer prayers with his friends, and Frank’s “soul will be saved” (105).
The scene so far is completely in the hands of the male who wishes to
practice an alien ritual akin to but not identical to bella figura, an evan-
gelical raising of spirits. But Lucia Santa is having none of it, and Puzo
gives her a stinging subjective appraisal of male religious rhetoric be-
yond Colucci’s consciousness:
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble               129



     Lucia Santa became coldly, implacably angry at his touch. Who
     was this man with his single child, a stranger to her grief and
     suffering, to presume to comfort her? Callow, criminal in his
     meddlesome religiosity—he was the cause of her husband’s
     illness. He and his friends had disordered her husband’s mind
     with their foolishness, their obscene and obsequious familiar-
     ity with God. And beyond that she had a feeling of disgust for
     Mr. Colucci. . . . She hated him. It was she who would feel the
     anguish, the rage of the sufferer who must bow to fate; as for
     Mr. Colucci, his would be the easy tears of compassion. (105)

       Here Puzo imagines the woman’s critique of such male ritual and
confident vanity in a perspective wholly missing from The Godfather. Her
understanding of the scene is deep and angry, a monologue in a charac-
ter zone far beyond Puzo’s tamer “As if the Don could truly snatch
back . . .” Colucci’s attempt to transact a ritual leading to a cure is not
what Lucia Santa would think of as bella figura. She believes his rhetoric
an “obscene and obsequious familiarity with God,” a succinct statement
of what men do as far as she’s concerned and an excellent place to ini-
tiate a moral criticism of The Godfather. This indictment is Puzo’s own
pre-Godfather leveling of its sonorous piety in the face of all the death-
dealing. Lucia Santa is never silenced by the male narrative and gives her
own criticism of Colucci “and all men who sought something beyond
life, some grandeur.” She knows her agonies will remain when Colucci
and perhaps her husband himself are gone. Then Colucci’s tears would
be “the easy tears of compassion.” It’s as if Puzo has let Genco’s wife
speak for herself to provide moral knowledge of the emptiness of the
male melodrama around a deathbed. Such a place of sex, childbirth,
conception, and childbirth is simply not the men’s place. The “easy tears
of compassion” are not Lucia Santa’s tears or those of women in general.
She weeps more specifically through “the rage of the sufferer who must
bow to fate.” Lucia Santa previously expressed “that secret contempt for
male heroism that many women feel but never dare express” (80), that
men never risk their bodies day after day “as all women do in the act of
love” as their “bodies open up into a great bloody cavern year after year”
(81). Puzo demonstrates he is fully capable of writing more complex
scenes from the woman’s view. Unlike the Genco deathbed scene he
would write five years later, this scene in The Fortunate Pilgrim contains
a rich dialogism between male and female viewpoints that does not
depend on Mafia dynamics of the Corleones versus the United States of
America for its effects. To keep The Godfather on sensational point, Puzo
omitted much of the richness of family dynamics, of women’s domestic
role and maternal power—strong elements of The Fortunate Pilgrim.
       Puzo may also have been freed to write of his Italian American
subjects so sensationally in The Godfather because Puzo, a Neapolitan,
130                              Chapter 4



was writing about Sicilians. If Naples is coded as the colorful south of
Italy to most northern Italians, then Sicily is Naples’ own violent lawless
southland. Puzo’s one Sicilian episode in The Fortunate Pilgrim is quite
simplistic if not derogatory in its rendering and shows just what happens
when a Sicilian comes slumming around in this more highfalutin’ ethnic
novel. Lucia Santa’s eldest son, Larry Angeluzzi, is sleeping with a
matronly woman of his mother’s generation, while her husband is busy
making and selling bootleg wine. When the husband is briefly jailed,
Mrs. Le Cinglata is badgered by suitors. One is a “dark Sicilian,” who
holds her skirt in the “innocent lechery” of a “childish man.” He mocks
Larry as a rival (“[D]o you serve children here?”) and tosses everyone “a
look of excruciating slyness” as he asks in “deferential broken English,”
“Itsa your son? Youra nepha-ew?” When the Signora tells him to stop his
insults and find somewhere else to drink, the Sicilian threatens to tell her
husband about Larry, sticking out his chest “like a singer at the opera.”
The Signora instructs Larry to throw him down the stairs, whereupon
the Sicilian “roars” in broken English, “You little shitta American
cockasickle. You throw me down the stairs? I eat you up whole anda
whole.” Larry easily knocks him to the kitchen floor and realizes “the
man could not use his hands and had not meant him real harm. He had
come like a hugging bear to chastise a child, grotesque, human without
being cruel” (43–44).
       Nothing in this scene prepares the reader for the omnipotence of
Sicilians in The Godfather, in which they not only dominate other Italian
Americans but have invisible control over much in the larger American
society. Puzo doesn’t even give his character a name here: he is Sicilian,
a type, dark, crude, sensual, comically menacing, the only character out
of the scores in The Fortunate Pilgrim whose speech is rendered in broken
English. Such a comically negative portrayal of a Sicilian suggests some-
thing other than writing “below” his gifts, as Puzo described the writing
of The Godfather; it suggests that he is writing “below” his class and
region and is not invested in portraying the humanity or complexity of
the Sicilian in The Fortunate Pilgrim. Similarly, to stand outside the
Corleones as Sicilian is to be able to manipulate them in ways that might
not have been available to him in the more autobiographical Fortunate
Pilgrim. However, in a darker elite fiction stab at understanding Puzo as
author, we might allow for the improbability, after assimilating Puzo’s
Sicilian fool in The Fortunate Pilgrim, that The Godfather is a radical novel
of manners since melodrama itself is always dangerously close to tipping
over into burlesque in its broad gestures. Suffice to say, Puzo’s cameo
Sicilian in The Fortunate Pilgrim remains caught in brutta figura; he makes
all the wrong moves in the Neapolitan Italian immigrant world.
       Besides banishing Sicilians to comic relief and placing women in
control of major scenes, Puzo’s work in The Fortunate Pilgrim is distin-
guished from The Godfather in the way that it forces many confrontations
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 131



between Italian Americans who have multiple roles in its culture. All the
Italian characters in the novel interact with Lucia Santa’s family, and they
are a more varied group economically, socially, and culturally than the
Italians the reader meets through the tightly controlled Corleone family,
which is surrounded mainly by supplicants and victims. Lucia Santa’s
experience is restricted to events that impinge on her children’s lives and
fortunes; she sallies forth heroically on several occasions to protect her
family’s honor and survival. I want to look at several contact scenes to
demonstrate Puzo’s commitment in The Fortunate Pilgrim to a wider world
of ethnic forms and emendations than he allows himself to depict in The
Godfather, how the logic of the blockbuster melodrama would have ended
in mayhem while analogous scenes in The Fortunate Pilgrim end in the
negotiations of Lucia Santa, the mother and woman who wields a similar
yet different bella figura than Don Corleone.
       For the preface to a 1997 edition of The Fortunate Pilgrim, Puzo
made the significant admission that the figure of Don Corleone was re-
ally modeled after his mother: “whenever the Godfather opened his
mouth, in my mind I heard the voice of my mother. I heard her wisdom,
her ruthlessness, and her unconquerable love for her family and for life
itself. . . . without Lucia Santa, I could not have written The Godfather”
because the Don’s “humanity came from her” (xii). This statement sent
readers scurrying back to the text in some chagrin for having missed
such a possibility. In a changed reading climate for multiethnic and
gendered fiction at century’s end, could the great Don, most famous of
ethnic American male heroes, ultimately be feminine in sensibility and
traditional wielding of his family’s might? Lucia Santa might join
Steinbeck’s Ma Joad in The Grapes of Wrath, Arnow’s Gertie Nevels in The
Dollmaker, Morrison’s Sethe in Beloved, Erdrich’s Marie Kashpaw in Love
Medicine, and Tan’s Joy Luck Clubbers—but Don Corleone? The contem-
porary fictional hero most segregated from true dialogue with women,
the most powerful patriarchal figure in American popular fiction his-
tory? A few speculations are in order.
       The most cynical reaction would be that reissuing The Fortunate
Pilgrim with its conflation of Lucia Santa and Vito Corleone was Puzo’s
attempt to join the lingua franca of current fictional dialogue with a classic
ethnic American novel at a propitious time coinciding with the publica-
tion of The Last Don (1996). However, I tend to take Puzo at his word
about the link between Lucia Santa and Vito Corleone for several rea-
sons. First of all, what’s obvious from Puzo’s own family history (a father
disappearing when he was very young, a dead stepfather) is his search
for both a father in his fiction who would be a guiding force in his life
and his fictional creation of sons who would have to live up to the
father’s example and courage. Michael Corleone in becoming his father’s
son becomes his father, and a male familial order is established. Lucia
Santa and her son battle in wounding ways throughout Pilgrim, with
132                             Chapter 4



none of the resolution that occurs in The Godfather. It’s a stand-off be-
tween mother and son. Gino Corbo buries his father and then leaves his
family for good when he leaves his mother’s influence. Ultimately,
the only guiding “father” in Puzo’s life was his mother, and it is her
rhythms of speech and negotiation that he recreates in his Sicilian Ameri-
can Godfather.
      Furthermore, if we entertain the possibility that Puzo was “going
down” in subject matter to write about Sicilians at all, as evidenced in
the one reductive Sicilian scene in Pilgrim, Puzo needed to draw on the
authority and moral courage of the Neapolitan Lucia Santa to imbue Don
Corleone with his great dignity. The Godfather might then be seen as
hybridized within its ethnic materials, male and female centers of author-
ity, and Sicilian and Neapolitan “class” statements. Also, if Lucia Santa
becomes Don Corleone in Puzo’s mind, such a metamorphosis would
help account for the minimal role Mama Corleone plays in the novel.
Like the boorish Sicilian in Pilgrim, Mama Corleone is never given a
name and is described in her few scenes in The Godfather, in “grim, Italian
old crone fashion” from “a more primitive culture” (393, 268). With her
“wrinkled, leathery, olive-skinned face” and “heavy Italian accent,” she
informs Kay when Michael is in hiding, “You forget about Mikey, he no
the man for you anymore” (236–37). The irony is extreme, not casual.
Puzo writes about his mother as his mother, making her the heroine of
The Fortunate Pilgrim, only to have critics applaud and the public ignore
him. Puzo writes about his mother as the Godfather only to have critics
ignore him and the public make him rich and famous. The infusion of
maternal power and vitality into the silent, strong patriarch who always
guides his family, who “reasons” with his enemies, who is “very strait-
laced” in sex is yet another cross-gendered sleight-of-hand in the Ameri-
can popular culture whereby the role of a strong woman character is
recast into that of a “domestic” and “multiple” male character. All is
negotiated through heterosexual family roles within melodrama’s rigid
and sensational plot lines. The Godfather needs no true female characters
since Puzo’s mother, alias Lucia Santa recycled into Don Corleone, is in
firm control of the family’s destiny.
      Therefore it’s instructive to read from several scenes in The Fortu-
nate Pilgrim to see where Lucia Santa is and is not Vito Corleone in
training, to find where Puzo without the constraint of funneling all power
and knowledge through the great Don was able to allow more play in his
ethnic semiosis and more realistic confrontations across Italianita and
with the American culture. Although Lucia Santa is the unquestioned
matriarch in a family with first an absent, then an unbalanced husband,
her forays into Italian America on behalf of her family’s well-being show
her in a more complex negotiation of her power and its limits, con-
strained as an illiterate immigrant woman in an urban American setting
that perplexes and bewilders her. She first angrily ventures out into the
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                133



foreign land of New Jersey by ferry and streetcar to reclaim her infant
son, Vincent, who had been tentatively boarded with an Italian family
while she regained her strength after the death of her first husband.
Their house “had a pointed roof, like nothing she had ever seen in Italy,
as if it were a plaything, not to be used for people fullgrown. It was
white and clean, with blue shutters and a closed-in porch.” She finds
baby Vincent in “the prettiest room [he] would ever have” with a “blue
crib, a white stuffed horse” where he “lay in his own piss.” Lucia Santa
“stared around the pretty room with the dumb anger of an animal” and
“then what a drama was played” (36–37).
        Into the American one-family home comes the immigrant mother,
furious with righteousness. Filomena, the middle-class wife and Vincent’s
caretaker, sloughs off Lucia Santa’s accusations of maltreatment and hints
that the boarding arrangement was to have been permanent. After all, she
argues, look at the baby’s new clothes and pretty room. He would be
happy, go to the university, “become a lawyer, a doctor, even a profes-
sor. . . . What was she? She had no money. She would eat dirt with her
bread her whole life long” (38). The ethnic frame here contains both the
poor and the advantaged women, both still Italian Americans, with
Filomena closer to assimilation. With her view of Vincent’s future, Filomena
espouses Don Corleone’s view to Michael in the first Godfather film that he
hadn’t wanted him in the family business, that his goal had been for
Michael to become Senator Corleone, Governor Corleone. Michael’s reply
is “We’ll get there, Pop. We’ll get there.” In The Fortunate Pilgrim, oppor-
tunities come through similar Americanization but not at the threat of
violence. Becoming “legitimate” is leaving the ghetto and New York City,
coming to the pretty American room with toys. The choice for the ethnic
mother is to leave her baby son in suburban Italian America or take him
back to the tenements. Lucia Santa rears back and spits in Filomena’s face,
then flees from the house with her child in her arms. Such is the proper
female counterpart action in melodrama to the male’s decision to do any-
thing to provide for his children. The woman’s role is maternal, to enclose
the child in her arms; the male’s role is usually couched in economic terms,
“to feed my kids.” The most intimate male personal justification is to take
vengeance on a physical humiliation or unmanning, as when Michael’s
injuries to cheek and jaw finally provoke him into aligning himself with
his family against their enemies. With the woman, it’s often more primal
action to keep her children at all, the starkest narratives provided by slave
mothers from Stowe’s Eliza through Morrison’s life and death choices for
Sethe. For example, Lucia Santa’s defining rhetoric as matriarch in domes-
tic ethnic narrative is “Don’t fear. I’m your mother. No one can harm my
children. Not while I live” (40).
        Her resolve is tested again and again. Counterpoint to her scene of
rescuing baby Vincent from the wilds of New Jersey is her rescuing
her teenage son from an older married woman. Determined to bring
134                              Chapter 4



seventeen-year-old Larry home to sleep in his own room, she goes to the
Le Cinglata apartment where he has been sleeping with Signora Le
Cinglata, whom Lucia Santa grew up with in Italy before they both
emigrated. Their confrontation over Larry affords Puzo the opportunity
to show a women’s dialogized ethnic scene in which the leverage they
each seek in argument comprises another example of bella figura, which
ultimately collapses. The Le Cinglatas, husband and wife, begin in the
most flowing language. The husband, a knowing cuckold, praises Larry
for helping guard the bootlegging business when he’s away from home.
Lucia Santa tentatively breaks in to ask if Larry hadn’t slept there some
night. The wife chides Lucia Santa that her “son is a grown man,” and
“we are not in Italy,” prompting Lucia Santa, “met with rudeness,” to
voice her true feelings”:

      She said coldly, politely, “Ah. Signora, you don’t know what
      trouble children make. How could you, you who are so fortu-
      nate not to have any? Ah, the worries of a mother, a cross pray
      to Christ you will never have to bear. But let me tell you this,
      my dear Le Cinglata, America or no America, Africa, or even
      England, it does not signify.” (68)

      Lucia Santa in one sentence manages to score Le Cinglata for her
barreneness, laud her own maternal suffering, and take her stand behind
a universal code: her son will sleep at home; regardless of ethnic origin,
that’s the way things should be. They now meet verbally in bitter insult,
Le Cinglata reminding Lucia Santa that no one in Italy with the name of
Angeluzzi or Corbo was nobility, that her husband, “the closest friend
and fellow worker of your son’s true father [Angeluzzi], almost a god-
father, he is not to be a friend to Lorenzo?” Lucia Santa feels “trapped”
and curses the other woman’s “slyness” in speech. How has she been
parried by Le Cinglata? Clearly because the other woman has hidden
behind male patrimony and rank and has cleverly shifted the insult from
herself to her husband. The women begin to joust over men’s names and
reputations, as they must with the husband in the room. The speech
rules are dictated by audience and setting as much as by speakers. When
Le Cinglata plays her best card: “Now tell me. Does the boy’s own mother
believe the worst of him?” Lucia Santa “with the husband looking down her
throat [emphasis mine] said hurriedly, ‘No, no. But people talk. Your
husband is a sensible man, thank God.’ ” But just then, Larry Angeluzzi
enters familiarly with a suitcase and “the tableau that this made ex-
plained everything to the mother” (even as Kay knew all she needed to
know when she sees through the parlor door that Clemenza defers to
Michael at the end of The Godfather). Lucia Santa still is able to maintain
her indirection and asks Larry if her cooking does not please him any-
more. Larry tells her to stop kidding; the husband takes his cue from
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble               135



Larry, the other male, and speaks to her ever more familiarly. Now “truly
shocked for one of the few times in her life,” she orders Larry to get all
his things “and come back to your own roof. I don’t leave here until you
come” (70).
       Puzo shows how supple Lucia Santa must be in tacking through
the field of argument. Besieged by a husband and wife and her own son,
she indirectly accuses the older man of being cuckolded by her own
blood and yet keeps track of her primary goal—to bring that son back to
his own home. The signora taunts Larry that he’s a baby, Lucia Santa hits
her son in the face, and Larry pushes her against the kitchen table. She
hisses, thank God his father is dead because he should “not see his son
beating his own mother for the sake of strangers”; Larry feels “guilty,
conscience-stricken, to see tears of humiliation in his mother’s eyes” (71).
The greatest sin and crime here is the loss of control, of crumbling as a
family to outsiders. Lucia Santa in the strong woman’s role is, however,
subject to many curbs on her authority: a woman, a woman alone, a
woman alone against an intransigent husband and a promiscuous wife,
a woman whose son is beyond her physical control, an immigrant woman
alone in a strange land. Puzo’s writer’s task here is as intricate as Lucia
Santa’s. He must portray in much more subtle and shifting mimetic ren-
dering what in The Godfather he might bring abruptly and sensationally
or ominously to closure through the threat of major violence. However,
Lucia Santa runs out of weapons, rhetorical or otherwise, against Larry
and the Le Cinglatas, so much so that she sins against omerta by threat-
ening to go to the police if he isn’t in her home that evening: “[S]elling
wine and whiskey is one thing but here in America they protect children.
As you said, Signora, we are not in Italy” (71).
       Lucia Santa invokes Americana, the necessary threat albeit in her-
esy of a mother without a godfather to mediate the problem. She hybrid-
izes the scene into one of interpenetration with American authorities
beyond the Le Cinglata apartment, and her ploy works. That night a
Black Hand “lawyer” appears to say, in effect, how did we all let things
go so far? The hidden agenda is, of course, that the bootlegging opera-
tion needs continued protection from the police: could Larry have one
more night out to save his manhood, and then he’ll come home? Lucia
Santa was “pleased and flattered and recognized the truth. She nodded
assent” (72–73). I’ve stayed with this complex domestic negotiation to
point out Puzo’s care in registering the nuances of immigrant family
crisis. The heroine of The Fortunate Pilgrim in her need to speak through
alternate power and submission moved Puzo to depict each and every
role in the sort of heteroglossia that Bakhtin makes a cornerstone of
fictional exchange and that ethnicity and gender roles both enrich and
qualify. Lucia Santa must speak through a woman’s muted heteroglossia,
must appropriate what is most often a very male seminal concept
in Bakhtin.15
136                               Chapter 4



       Lucia Santa and her daughter, Octavia, have a much more varied
and dynamic relationship than that of Vito and Michael Corleone in The
Godfather. Octavia is her mother’s confederate against the male society
but just as often her fierce critic and antagonist as she fights for her own
emancipation as a second-generation immigrant in America. When Octavia
returns to her mother after six months in the hospital recovering from a
serious pleurisy, she encounters La Fortezza, a hapless young Italian
social worker who has been helping the family get money in her absence
while taking a little kickback on the side. Lucia Santa is resigned to this
traditional way of doing business, but Octavia flares when La Fortezza
begins to patronize her. He observes no forms of respect, no reserve but
“abandoning his Italian manner, said in a friendly American voice, briskly,
casually, ‘I’ve heard a lot about you, Octavia. Your mother and I have
had some good long talks. We’re old friends’ ” (178). This alien speech
overture makes Octavia furious that he’d take her for some easy working
girl, and she scrutinizes him further as a sorry hybrid of Italianita and
Americana without “that slim American debonair charm” who became
“more and more animated, loquacious and charming as his two dark
circled owl eyes would permit” (178). He continues to devalue her sen-
sibility without ever inquiring as to its depth and tells her she should
read Zola to learn about her station in life. Finally he invites her to go to
the theater using cut-rate tickets he gets from the city, urging her to
accept because “it will be a new experience” for her (179).
       Octavia is incredulous. She’d been to the theater, all the girls in the
dressmaking shops got tickets, too, and she’d read all about the “gener-
ous witless maidens who exposed themselves to shame” in popular novels
for the pleasure of young men tempting them with a good time. She
thinks that “this stupid starving guinea college kid thought he could
screw her” (180). She drops the forced ritual of a sham ethnic courtship
overture and spits out, “ ‘You can go shit in your hat, you lousy bastard,’’
a preface to:

      You take eight dollars a month from my poor mother, who has
      four little kids to feed and a sick daughter. You bleed a family
      with all our trouble and you have the nerve to ask me out? . . .
      You’re old-fashioned, all right. Only a real guinea bastard from
      Italy with that respectful Signora horseshit would pull some-
      thing like that. But I finished high school. I read Zola, and I
      have gone to the theater, so find some greenhorn girl off the
      boat you can impress and try to screw her. (180)

     Octavia speaks politically, correctly assessing what La Fortezza sees
as her gendered and class role. Unlike Kay or Connie in The Godfather,
she has no need to play the game of euphemisms in bella figura. She has
no power to conserve, no agenda to strengthen, and is under no male or
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 137



family protectorate, nor must she bow to one. Openly expressing con-
tempt for his Old World male-dominant assumptions, she point-for-point
discredits La Fortezza’s ethnic act (“only a real guinea bastard from Italy”)
while establishing markers to counter him. The first is education; she has
finished high school in America. Second, she has read literary naturalism
(Zola) and gone to plays. Thus La Fortezza must revert to finding a
“greenhorn girl off the boat” because Octavia is already an American girl
backed by the cultural capital to prove it. To further sever Octavia from
the Italian maternal immigrant imaginary, Puzo has her marry a Jewish
poet who writes in both Yiddish and English, and she bears no children.
Puzo pointedly does not deliver her into some generalized American
future; as Lucia Santa thinks, “my most intelligent child, picked for a
husband the only Jew who does not know how to make money.”
       Puzo’s work with cross-cultural and gendered ethnicities in The
Fortunate Pilgrim is always complex and realistic in continual negotiation
and surprise. In contrast, Puzo in The Godfather consistently polarizes a
deadly and unrelenting Sicilian family presence against a general Ameri-
can family that Michael and the Don reference when it pleases them but
that has no real life in the novel except in the highly stylized chapters on
victims (Woltz, McCluskey) or in the fealty owed to the family by the
outsiders it absorbs (Kay, Tom Hagen, Jules Segal). The Godfather’s abso-
lutes further the world of melodrama. Characters in The Fortunate Pilgrim
touch and are touched by more currents of cultural interpenetration and
influence since they are never in positions of power to conserve or take
over. The motions of the novel are more democratic among male and
female characters who are more or less equals in want, hopes, dreams,
and cultural conditioning. However, within Italianita, they occupy an
array of positions and responses dictated by a number of external indi-
cators of education, class, and economics with the resultant play in their
sensibilities. In The Godfather, Michael hustles Kay with images about
what their children and they themselves will become: “I want them to
grow up to be All-American kids, real All-American, the whole works”
and “you and I will be part of some country club crowd, the good simple
life of well-to-do Americans” (363). This flat national script is lifeless and
reductive, not interesting as language or sociology and without drama,
referencing image bites that do not even make sense, as in “simple”
country clubbers. Puzo made Lucia Santa a more vivid critic of the Ital-
ian past and a more articulate visionary of what America could mean:

     America was not Italy. In America you could escape your
     destiny. Sons grew tall and worked in an office with collars
     and ties, away from the wind and earth. Daughters learned to
     read and write, and wore shoes and silk stockings, instead of
     slaughtering the bloody pig and carrying wood on their backs
     to save the strength of valuable donkeys. (267)
138                              Chapter 4



      Lucia Santa’s American sons will be more like Alger boys, climbing
the ranks of management rather than covert murderers in the name of
reason. Daughters granted literacy will be freed from centuries of ties to
a bloody earth where animals have more value than women. The vivid-
ness of her metaphors are what contribute to making The Fortunate Pil-
grim a true ethnic novel, rooted in the unmourned-for earth and uprooted
to the transplanted concrete tenements of New York City. In comparison,
The Godfather is artificial, not interested in growing lives as much as
holding on to rigid advantage, closing in and closing down. At root,
Lucia Santa’s intimation of woman’s physical reality, her body “open[ing]
up into a great bloody cavern year after year” (81) is the violence and
terrible beauty of new life in a new land, which Puzo knew intimately in
her novel and conveniently forgot in the epic of the great Don who is
acquainted only with death by male fiat and violence.


                   Dr. Barbato and Dr. Segal

      The social worker La Fortezza smugly addresses Octavia from what
he believes to be strengths. He speaks “college Italian,” owes his father
money for law school, and has read about the poor in books. Whenever
he comes to visit, Lucia Santa fixes him an American ham and cheese
sandwich on white bread for he has a weak stomach and “turn[s] up his
nose at honest Italian salami and tingling sharp provolone, the crusty
gum-cutting Italian bread” (166–67). La Fortezza represents one foot on
the ladder of American assimilation; he’s become too American to be
Italian but has little acquired American capital, only just enough to draw
Octavia’s scorn as some sort of alien creature who belongs in neither
world; he’s an easy target for both Octavia and Puzo.
      A more complex figure between two worlds in The Fortunate Pilgrim
is Dr. Silvio Barbato, who “was young but he had no illusions about the
Hippocratic oath. . . . [He] was too intelligent in his own right to be sen-
timental about these southern Italians who lived like rats along the western
wall of the city. But still he was young enough to think of suffering as
unnatural. Pity had not been squeezed out of him” (106). Rather than
simply displaying his newfound cultural capital, Barbato broods about
the plight of the immigrant Italians because “he always wished that the
people who gave him money were a little better dressed, that they had
better furniture” (108). Although “his escape was complete” (107), his
medical treatment of both Octavia and Lucia Santa finds him conceptu-
alizing them in ways with strict reference to Bourdieu’s designations of
class-bound distinction through differing aesthetic perception. “Dr. Barbato
was simply a man who could not stand the sight and smell of poverty”
(161), and his guilt about that fact frustrates him enormously as it iso-
lates him from the class from which he came. Unlike the simplistic La
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                139



Fortezza, who makes moves on Octavia, Dr. Barbato aestheticizes Lucia
Santa and her daughters as a stay against both his sentiment and his
desire, the driving forces of a more popular narrative than Puzo writes
here. As Lucia Santa bathes the feverish brow of her young daughter,
Barbato first casts them in a religious painting with “the reposing mother
tending the child” and the dim yellow electric bulb “casting a beatific
glow” on the walls. Rather than moving swiftly to treatment, he “tried
to isolate the resemblance” and “realized from his reading that it was
simply a peasant upbringing, the child’s complete reliance on its mother.
These were the people that famous painters had used” (170). Also, Lucia
Santa’s “swelling buttocks” “like her daughter’s” were those “of the
sensual Italian nudes hung in Florence, great, rounded . . . but they aroused
no desire in him. None of these women could” (171–72). Barbato finds art
a way to deflect both his sympathy and his desire. To move the family
into the realm of classic paintings absolves him on many fronts while
stamping his sympathy with a more abstract cast, its relation in art cast-
ing out all rage and frustration. Dr. Barbato is making a classic use
of cultural capital to erect barriers against his own ethnic confusion
and guilt.
      Dr. Barbato makes two more philosophical-aesthetic moves that
distance him precisely in the manner of elite fiction into an abstract or
symbolic relation to his medical practice. When he leaves the Corbo house,
he “ponder[s] the world and humanity. He [feels] something resembling
awe” (172). An allied strategy to aestheticizing is universalizing, and
Puzo has Dr. Barbato follow this tack to the point of sounding almost as
if Puzo has cribbed from another American doctor, William Carlos Wil-
liams, in a classic poem such as “To Elsie”:16 “[Dr. Barbato] felt angry,
challenged, that this had been permitted to happen in his sight, as if his
face had been slapped, as if he were being dared to interfere in some
cosmological bullying” (173). Such liberal tristesse converted to ironic
shaking of fists at the universe is, on a more sustained ontological plane,
the stuff of tragedy. Puzo rehabilitates the poor doctor just in time. Hav-
ing cycled through Renaissance painting and intimations of the negative
sublime within a page-and-a half, “his blood now turned hot” and “for
the next two months Dr. Barbato, out of pure rage, practiced the art of
healing” (173). After art galvanizes him into action, he tends the Corbo
family without stabs at final questions or tasteful excursions into art to
manage his conflicts. These varied responses by the young Italian Ameri-
can doctor are very well done by Puzo and show a range of understand-
ing of the representation and consciousness of the sensitive ethnic
subject-as-outsider beyond any insight Puzo gave to any character in The
Godfather. If Vito or Michael Corleone had stopped to ironically ponder
their roles through art or philosophy, their souls might have been saved,
but more likely their lives would have been lost. The logic of their text
does not admit self-scrutiny, nor does popular fiction.
140                              Chapter 4



      To get a second opinion on doctors in Puzo, consider once more Dr.
Jules Segal, one of The Godfather’s triad of Jewish American minor char-
acters, along with villains Jack Woltz and Moe Greene. Puzo divests Dr.
Segal of his ethnicity, never having him interact with Jewish American
patients or with his family. He’s another wronged crusader recruited
from unjust infamy by the Corleones. Once “one of the youngest and
most brilliant surgeons in the East,” he claims he has “gone bad” per-
forming abortions and facing subsequent investigations. He is cut from
the first Godfather film, but in the novel, his major claim to fame is as the
sculptor of Lucy Mancini’s newly snug vagina and Johnny Fontane’s
newly scraped throat and vocal cords. He is, then the medical man who
can “arrange” and “fix” like Amerigo Bonasera with corpses. When Lucy
can barely talk about her perceived deformity, practicing gynecological
omerta, Jules does not take refuge in art or philosophy but says, “You
dope, you incredible dope. . . . Are you really that innocent” (312). He
preaches, “Now listen to me, if you had a decent modern raising with a
family culture that was part of the twentieth century, your problem would
have been solved years ago” (311). Naturally such sensitive handling of
the problem dictates that Lucy fall deeply in love with Jules, and the
reader moves step-by-step through her shame, operation, the jokes about
it, and the rehabilitation into great sex. Little wonder that Coppola in
1972 performed surgery to remove Lucy and Jules from his film.
      Jules Segal confidently and self-righteously tenders medical advice
to everyone, berating Nino Valenti’s death wish, challenging Johnny
Fontane to “be a man,” so he can examine his throat. He bewilders Johnny
who “knew why Jules irritated him. The doctor’s voice was always cool,
the words never stressed no matter how dire, the voice always low and
controlled. If he gave a warning the warning was in the words alone, the
voice itself was neutral, as if uncaring” (372). The medical rhetoric is a
specific speech that Johnny simply cannot fathom; there’s no bella figura
that he can identify. Without gesture or performance, Johnny, steeped in
such language in personal and professional life, cannot believe in Jules’s
statements. Puzo encapsulates the miscommunication between the two
perfectly when Jules snaps, “I warned you,” and Johnny shoots back,
“You didn’t warn me right” (372). This exchange is a microcosm of The
Godfather’s language play, one that has ominous result. When a Corleone
message is misinterpreted or not received “right,” consequences are stark.
The Fortunate Pilgrim just as often breaks into its language transactions
with the American script as a powerful external determinant. Ethnic fic-
tion is fundamentally about misreading, the tragicomic lot we fall heir to
from differing language and cultural backgrounds, and reified in a set of
gestural and behavioral characteristics. Ethnic fiction tells how to “warn
[us] right” and sharpens our apprehension of how much we often miss
collectively when a reader discounts group and national speech dynam-
ics and culture. Like Dr. Barbato, it’s often too much altogether for us,
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 141



and we want to get all our quarrels with the world into one image, one
speech, one character. Yet The Fortunate Pilgrim by staying in one tene-
ment amongst a dozen raging, living souls portrays a wider humanity
and range of literary argument under Lucia Santa’s regime than The
Godfather lurching from New York to Hollywood to Sicily to Las Vegas
and back, while straining under the monolithic power of one man and
one law without self-reflection.


                  Gino and Michael Want Out:
                    The Critics Come Home

      For Puzo, Gino Corbo’s battle with his mother is the autobiographi-
cal center of The Fortunate Pilgrim. Gino is the restless family explorer, the
son most interested in the great city beyond the Italian ghetto. Puzo does
not craft Gino as the sensitive artist-in-training; he is no easily wounded,
reflecting moral center of consciousness; rather he has Puzo’s wary fear
of “going under” at a young age to family pressure and responsibility. As
has been previously discussed, Michael Corleone has a complicated eth-
nic passage in the extended Godfather narrative. He escapes into World
War II America, rescues the family in crisis, flees to the Old World in
Sicily, and finally becomes his father by the end of the novel. Godfather
II and Godfather III show both the power and the pressures that threaten
to break Michael and the family apart as Puzo and Coppola’s epic be-
comes darker and more moralistic. What remains in this chapter on read-
ing the ethnic Puzo is to chart Gino and Michael’s attempts at “breaking
away” and how they relate to Puzo’s own continued attempt to both be
the chronicler of his ethnic identity and to strain against it.
      Such chronicling and “straining against” became in the 1990s the
extraordinary fact of a generation of prominent American literary critics
and theorists becoming more overtly interested in aligning their writing
with their Italian American roots. Such an interest is providing a new
literature of memoirs and novels according to a process that Boelhower
calls “imaginative circling” (“Adjusting Sites” 58). The list of critic theo-
rists who have commented on their Italianita or made it the subject of
their writing comprises a quite extraordinary roster in the 1990s, a veri-
table who’s who of modern and postmodern criticism: Sandra Gilbert,
Josephine Gattuso Hendin, Linda Hutcheon, Cathy N. Davidson, Marianna
DeMarco Torgovnick, Robert Viscusi, and Frank Lentricchia.17 They re-
flect on what this dual status has meant for their writing life (Gilbert,
Hutcheon, Davidson). They write realist memoirs (Torgovnick) or allu-
sive and experimental fiction (Lentricchia, Viscusi). These writers all
combine an extraordinary self-knowledge of what it means to write from
a professional, knowing position within Bourdieu’s habitus, with an equally
sensitive vantage point of memory from within the spatial coordinates of
142                               Chapter 4



Boelhower’s habitare, what he most recently calls “the art of dwelling”
(64).18 They combine deep critical knowledge and formal training with the
lived experience of Italian American family ties to explore in a synthesis of
the ethnic realism and ethnic semiosis from the inside. Already semioticians
in their own careers, they now study themselves in relation to self.
       This latest generation of Italian American writer-critics practices a
sophisticated midcareer version of what Garadaphe calls “breaking and
entering” (1995), the desire of the Italian American writer to enter literary
conversations and culture and through their ethnic ensemble, to “come
back in” rather than “want out” as Puzo repeatedly did. They possess a
deep knowledge of modernism and postmodernism, a commitment to
criticism and theory that is now not sufficient for them, and a desire for
formal experiment and the use of tropes. Finally they have the potential to
understand both ethnic purity and cross-cultural hybridity and to move
between them in their writing; that space is the writing itself within both
a cultural and a literary dialogue. This most recent literary emigration arriv-
ing back at an autobiographical self suggests a coherence and integration
that Puzo could never muster in his writing, since he hardly respected his
own literary or ancestral origins enough. At age seventy-six, on publication
of The Last Don, he told an interviewer that the “public loves for me to do
the Italian stuff” (Fleming 2) so what can [he] do? Puzo fought against being
a pilgrim, fortunate or otherwise. He never wanted to be an emissary from
or to Italianita. Yet in a curious way, much of the autobiographical-fictional
energy now extant in Italian American writing was provoked into existence
by Puzo’s notoriety, by the force-field surrounding The Godfather—what it
provided in pride, consternation, disgust, envy, or recognition.19
       While the imaginative work of these Italian American writer-critics
and its potential is beyond the scope of this chapter, it’s instructive to
hypothesize what Puzo’s achievement and writing ethic might have meant
in light of this expansion and dialogue. Puzo splits himself into Gino and
his brother Vincent at the outset of The Fortunate Pilgrim. In chapter 1,
ten-year-old Gino runs through the nighttime tenement city, exuberantly
zigzagging from one street to another in a playful chase by other boys;
he screams “burn the city, burn the city” in “hysterical triumph”; Then
at his own front stoop, “he aimed himself at his mother’s enormous
menacing figure . . . and swerved away through the door and up the
stairs.” Lucia Santa intent on striking him lets him pass in a mixture of
“fierce pride and tenderness at her child’s wild joy” (21). His brother
Vincent—sadder, quieter, already “melancholy by nature” at thirteen—
watches the street scene from the window, “brood[ing] to the softened
whispery sound of the summer night. . . . He was self-exiled” (19). Vincent
has a putative aesthetic consciousness, in line with modernism’s artistic
rebellion for the ethnic hero in a bildungsroman or kunstleroman, but he
transmits weakly without an artist’s drive; he’s destined to be a victim.
Gino, however, takes evasive action in America.
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 143



         Puzo bestows on Vincent the honor of portraying in fiction his own
happiest days of childhood, his summers from ages nine to fifteen as a
Fresh Air Fund kid. He and other “slum children were boarded on private
families in places like New Hampshire for two weeks” (“Choosing a Dream”
21). In the essay, Puzo describes a veritable encylopedia of antiethnic
Americana: cows, pastures, clear brooks, hay wagons, Bible classes, flower
gardens, swings, see-saws, sizzling frankfurters, roasted corn, unlocked
houses, no quarrels, no raised voices (21–22). Vincent adds to the picture
in Puzo’s fiction with an Edenic report to his family: “raspberries grew on
bushes wherever you went. You just ate everything when you felt like
it. . . . Everybody had a car because there were no subways or trolley
car. . . . Then Vincent showed them his pajamas. He was the first one in the
family to own a pair” (The Fortunate Pilgrim 83). Puzo has immigrant mother
Lucia Santa gaze back at this wondrous America: “There were good people
in the world, then, that made strange children happy. What kind of people
were these? How safe they must be that they could squander love and
money on a boy they had never seen and might never see again. Vaguely
she sensed that outside her world was another as different as another
planet” (83–84).20
         Lucia Santa’s view that anywhere outside her world might as well be
another planet leads to Puzo’s own interplanetary retelling of the ethnic
narrative for the film of Superman (1978),21 called a “meta-narrative of
immigration” where the hero’s power lies in a “secret identity hidden . . .
under a disabling Anglo conformity” (Ferraro “Blood in the Marketplace”
283). In the ice crystal scene at the North Pole, young Clark Kent is surely
brought into knowledge of his destiny; he has no way out of it because
assimilation is not an option. Marlon Brando, who plays both Vito Corleone
and Superman’s father Jor-El, presents a postmodern image cluster for
Puzo in wish-fulfillment; wherever he turns, there’s a father. Certainly the
broad outlines of the comic book hero’s origins and maturation were most
congenial to fatherless, ethnically conflicted Puzo—the all-powerful father
on another planet (Jor-El on Krypton), a literally disintegrating “Old World,”
sends his son adrift in the universe toward an Earth that miraculously
morphs into the Kent farm, a perfect reincarnation of Puzo and Vincent
Corbo’s Fresh Air Fund summers in New Hampshire.22
         In his essay recalling his fresh-air summers, Puzo describes these
New England forays without any irony as simply the happiest part of his
childhood. They provided him a snapshot of a secure rural America,
surely the one Michael Corleone so off-handedly suggests is worth join-
ing in The Godfather. It’s Kay Adams country, and Puzo preserves it in the
trace of American antiquity and virtue she brings to the Corleone family.
Even so, Puzo is unsure how to use the referent beyond an inert America
that lies beyond his characters’ reach, as it always does for his Sicilians
in The Godfather. As always, the contact zones of a truly dialogized ethnic
and American clash are beyond him. Puzo mistrusts the opportunity as
144                              Chapter 4



author for such tension, what writers such as Viscusi and Lentricchia
inherit from Fante and Mangione. Except for his summer American in-
terlude, Vincent comes to the reader as always stunned and yoked to the
immigrant’s work world of responsibility and exhaustion, the same dead-
ening image that Puzo intimated in “Choosing a Dream.” Vincent cannot
imaginatively “circle” in Boelhower’s phrase (“Adjusting Sites” 64) for
Puzo will not allow him to become a literary ambassador, as Gardaphe
writes of Mangione’s “sense of adapting to two different worlds” (“Break-
ing and Entering” 10). To build that circuit, the conflict between “Who
Am I” and “Where is Here” (Boelhower 66), would have meant remain-
ing the vital artist, and after creating cameos such as Dr. Barbato in The
Fortunate Pilgrim, Puzo was never interested, beyond the structurally
suggestive fact that Corleone (a “here”) became an “I” (Vito and his
son Michael).
      Gino watches Vincent’s submission and resists being placed in the
family’s economy. He journeys all the way to Central Park where “his
childish dreams did not include thoughts of money. He dreamed of brav-
ery on a battlefield, of greatness on a baseball diamond. He dreamed of
his own uniqueness” (127). “Uniqueness” is part of the complex Ameri-
can birthright of equality for all. Uniqueness is the elite literature signa-
ture for the privileged sensibility or character of a major fictional
protagonist. A unique character does not disappear into a melting pot or
a degrading urban poverty. Most important, a unique character does not
remain easily in the ethnic family and work for its survival. Lucia Santa
battles Gino for control of his own life, sensing in this son her true ren-
egade. When the increasingly hapless Vincent dies in a trainyard acci-
dent, much of Lucia Santa’s frustration over losing two husbands and
now a son is focused on Gino: “You never went to see your father in his
coffin. And while your brother was alive, you never helped him” (254).
She banishes him from Vincent’s funeral, even though Octavia tells her
she’s being crazy. Gino slinks in anyway, plays the role of an usher,
speaks to all the older women. Larry comes up to him and says, “me and
Octavia are gonna help you carry the load,” and Gino thinks, “all the
years had been spun away to bring him finally to what had always been
waiting for him. He would go to work, sleep, there would be no shield
between himself and his mother. He would be drawn into the family and
its destiny. He could never run away again. . . . It was almost good news”
(260). Tentatively, Gino “grows up” and thinks about getting a job. More
firmly, he has been claimed by the ethnic family. He can stop the “unique”
struggling now and relax into what had always been there. Such is
Michael’s “destiny” in The Godfather as well. By extension, to be drawn
into the family describes Puzo’s decision to finally write both The Fortu-
nate Pilgrim and The Godfather, to accept the ethnic subject, to quell his
terrors about feeling outside his family on the one hand and feeling
pulled under by them on the other. Such a surrender into the life and
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                145



control of ethnic and family environment was both Puzo’s great relief
and his worst fear. To truly engage that fear or probe that relief was
beyond him.
      At his core, Gino knows he still remains separate from family and
everyone else. As he spends the night by Vincent’s coffin in the darkened
funeral parlor, he lies awake letting his mind “tell what it truly felt, that
[his mother’s] grief was excessive, that she made a ceremony of death”
(264). Ironically his reaction to his mother is the reverse of what Lucia
Santa had truly felt about Colucci, the evangelist, that his “obscene” ease
in the face of life and death had been unconscionable, like that of all men.
Thus Puzo brings men and women to their largest impasse in The Fortu-
nate Pilgrim. Gino’s final thought in a dream is to “chain himself in the
known, lightless world he had been born in” (265), the ethnic womb
claiming him “to be a man.” However, history suddenly claims Gino for
the American narrative, offering him a chance to break away. On the first
Sunday of December 1941, Larry’s son is receiving First Communion,
Lucia Santa is making her special ravioli, and the entire family gathers
along with Lucia Santa’s neighbors and old friends. The setting is the
most familiar ethnic type scene of them all—a traditional meal, where
food preparation and consumption are meticulously described. Gino is
now working the midnight-to-eight shift handling billing for the railroad
and has reacted to this job with “pure hatred, physical” (271). The radio
is tuned to the New York Giants football game when suddenly Gino’s
head is bent very close, and then he is watching his mother intently:
“There was a smile on his face. It was a smile that was in some way
cruel.” Octavia asks Gino what is happening, and “Gino turned his back
to hide his face. ‘The Japs just attacked the United States,’ he said. He
turned up the radio and drowned out all the voices in the room” (274).
In this sentence, Puzo signifies how the national narrative has shockingly
taken precedence, how all the Italian American striving and individual
adjustment or maladjustment is a secondary story to be swallowed whole.
      “Pearl Harbor” as plot-turning determinant is certainly an all-
American cliché by the time Puzo invokes it in 1964 after its use in a
score of films and novels. However, as theorists of the Great Depression
contend that only the World War II economy truly brought America into
its postwar prosperity, it’s perhaps worth noting that the war hastened
and produced the first true melting pot in American history, melted into
the returning soldiers and their young families demanding opportunities
for an industrious conformity. Furthermore, if as the New Historicists
suggest, we start with the historical event and work back to the literary
narrative, we can find a cluster of energy around “Pearl Harbor Sunday”
that includes the ethnic celebration within a more generalized American
tradition very prevalent in 1941, that of “Sunday dinner,” the leisurely
early-to-midafternoon heavy meal on the Christian day of rest. In a secu-
larized country made up of so many vestiges of specifically marked ethnic
146                              Chapter 4



and national traditions, this meal, centered on family, is as “sacred” as
we get; that the “non-Christian” Japanese would bomb Pearl Harbor on
Sunday morning and that mainland America would hear about it with
their families at table makes Roosevelt’s “day that shall live in infamy”
even more heinous. Novelists and screenwriters have repeatedly returned
to December 7, 1941, and they do so knowing, even subconsciously, that
the contract between America as a country isolated from the world and
its ethnic sons from all over the world still isolated within her was des-
tined to change irrevocably and change the social and civic life of the
nation through the global struggle that followed.
       Gino’s triumphant teenage escape in The Fortunate Pilgrim is deep-
ened into endless consequence by the conclusion of Godfather II. Puzo
doesn’t follow Gino into World War II in The Fortunate Pilgrim any more
than we see Michael Corleone as a soldier. Puzo waits and brings Michael
back from the war as a hero, only to be plunged into the family’s war in
1946. Puzo and Coppola returned to “December 7, 1941” as social text in
Godfather II’s terrific coda that allows for a possible thematic rewriting of
Michael’s career in that film and by extension in his life. Godfather II
plunges Michael into the struggle to hold the Corleone empire together
in the 1950s; the relation between the film’s historical sweep and its
major scenes is too complex to go into here. Michael must deal with
family drift and traitors, Kay’s increasing independence and moral rebel-
lion, treacherous associates, corrupt politicians, Senate committees, ex-
panding markets, and the Cuban Revolution. He becomes both more
melancholy and more paranoid in his wielding of power. Late in the film,
he talks to his mother about how strong “Pop” (the Don) was and asks
if by being strong, you could lose your family. She replies that “you can
never lose your family,” the ironic truth of which is never more devas-
tating than when Michael orders the death of his brother Fredo for con-
spiring with Johnny Ola and Hyman Roth against the Corleones. To have
an identity as a Corleone is what follows you into death and moves you
to murder.23
       Michael is alone in the glass-walled main room of his Lake Tahoe
mansion when he hears the crack of the gunshot that signals Fredo was
shot in the motor boat by Al Neri. Coppola then crafts one more major
flashback scene, this time not to young Vito Corleone in Sicily or New
York City but to young Michael at the Corleone dinner table on Decem-
ber 7, 1941, or four years before the present time opening of the novel.24
The segue begins with Sonny (James Caan) fading into focus to announce
(as if to the viewer who believes the movie is over), “Hey everybody, pay
attention.” He introduces Carlo Rizzi for the first time to Connie, Fredo,
Michael, and Tom Hagen. Sonny says “that droopy thing over there is
my brother, Michael, we call him Joe College.” Michael is isolated “over
there,” sitting alone on the right side of the long table with Sonny at the
head and everyone else on the left. He dresses differently, wearing an
                   The Godfather and the Ethnic Ensemble                 147



open-collar white shirt and checked sport coat, while the other male
Corleones are in coat and tie. It is the Don’s birthday, and the family is
waiting to surprise him when he comes home from a Christmas shop-
ping errand. After Tessio arrives with a huge rum cake, Sonny turns the
talk to the “nerve of them Japs,” those “slanty-eyed bastards” dropping
bombs “on Pop’s birthday,” as he unerringly reduces probable world
war to Corleone life. Tessio observes that thirty thousand men have
enlisted already. When Sonny answers that they “risk their life for strang-
ers,” Michael replies, “[T]hat’s Pop talking.” Then he announces that he
himself enlisted in the Marines. Sonny has to be restrained from pum-
meling him. Sonny says Michael will break his father’s heart on his birth-
day; Fredo shakes his hand; Tom stares hard at him and says his father
had talked about his future, that he has high hopes for Michael. Michael
flares slightly to Hagen: “[Y]ou talked to my father about my future.”
Tom and Sonny run out of arguments and anger; there’s a bustle in the
hall announcing the Don has arrived home, and everyone goes out to
meet him except Michael, who remains seated in the now-deserted room,
listening to the calls of “[S]urprise!” and the singing of “[F]or he’s a jolly
good fellow.” This deft scene resurrects Fredo, Sonny, Carlo, and the
Don; suddenly Michael has a family again. However, the table is curi-
ously void of women, children, Italian food; even the cake is store-bought.
The scene has the dreamlike quality of a pared-down abstraction with no
quotidian markers of either an immigrant generation or of an Italian
American life. Every ethnic fictional meal is potentially a Last Supper,
but Michael has summoned no ghosts/guests for such redemption, merely
to show how alone he really is and always has been.25
      The family voices drown out Michael’s “American” announcement.
By the end of Godfather II, Fredo’s murder triggers Michael’s memory of
the day he announced he was out, that he had made his escape, the day
he thought he could “lose” his family by joining America’s struggle.
Instead, he lost his family through his return to family, his leadership,
violent rule, and alienation of each and every one of them. Coppola has
one more even briefer flashback, this time to an earlier scene in the film
in which a younger Vito Corleone holds a tiny Michael up to a train
window to help him wave good-bye as the train pulls out of Corleone,
Sicily, after Vito’s triumphant return to take vengeance on the aged Don
who had slaughtered his family. For a few silent seconds, Coppola frames
a “wave good-bye, Michael” scene that has many resonances for the
adult Michael as he sits brooding.26 The very young son whose hand is
being waved by a father is similar to baby Michael’s hand being held up
by a wondrous Vito Corleone on the tenement front stoop after he comes
home from the day’s work of killing Fanucci. A small cog caught in a
predetermined plot. Being counted in before he could ask to be counted
out. Becoming a murderer himself who returned to Sicily on the run.
Leaving Sicily to return to America and try to become his father. Coppola
148                             Chapter 4



asks the viewer to believe that this is Michael’s earliest memory, one that
entwines father, Corleone, Sicily, and leave-taking in ways that he will
struggle with his whole life before being returned to the Sicilian earth at
the conclusion of Godfather III.


                             Conclusion

       Puzo richly explored Italianita in The Fortunate Pilgrim and sensa-
tionalized and simplified what he could carry into The Godfather before
the coda to Godfather II. All the time, he was, as his commentary has
shown, a reluctant son, husband, and Italian American. Breaking away,
being sucked back in, going under, going bad, and trying to become
legitimate are constant pressures in his work, both overt on the page and
felt in the allegiances and abdications of his characters to family and to
work. In “Choosing a Dream,” Puzo described the millions of new
American soldiers in World War II “making their innocent getaway from
baffled loved ones” (26), as in leaving the scene of a crime, one which
they will never be accused of by family who will never understand the
need. The Fortunate Pilgrim is Puzo’s one perfectly pitched ethnic novel
about his first escape. Puzo mapped the ethnic terrain in rudimentary
fashion in The Godfather, with monsters in the American blank spaces and
initially brought this Italian American subject to countless millions. The
Godfather is the American melodrama that greatly complicates all poten-
tial escapes and shows Puzo fully understood in Michael Corleone’s
odyssey toward identity across continents and worlds, both ethnic and
naturalized, that you can never lose your family.
                     chapter five


              Barthes and Puzo:
         The Authority of the Signifier
If I focus on a full signifier, in which I clearly distinguish the meaning and
the form, and consequently the distortion which the one imposes on the
other, I undo the signification of the myth, and I receive the latter as an
imposture. . . . This type of focusing is that of the mythologist: he deciphers
the myth, he understands a distortion.
                                                          —Barthes, Mythologies

Even in matters which are, as it were, just within our reach, what would
become of the world, if the practice of all moral duties and the foundations of
society, rested upon having their reasons made clear and demonstrative to
every individual?
                          —Edmund Burke, “A Vindication of Natural Society”
                                     in Francis Canavan, The Pluralist Game

      To describe how power and authority are negotiated through
Italianita in The Godfather is not to sanction the text’s immorality and
violence just because it is more colorful or dramatic when analyzed
through ethnic markers. To relax into that satisfaction would ultimately
be an insult to the richness of Italian American culture or any ethnic
culture and its universe of forms. Ethnic semiosis does not exist as a
concept to efface other questions about a novel’s forms and messages.
This chapter traces the interaction of structural and ideological questions
about The Godfather’s semantics, about the immediate and long-range
consequences of the novel’s signification in character zones and their
relation to and articulation of pluralism’s premises.
      Fiction best-seller lists are replete with novels that expound on every
sort of public and private virtue and vice. No subject is taboo; indeed, the
function of popular fiction is to talk about everything, albeit in deflecting
and manageable ways. Best sellers constantly broadcast messages about
sexuality, morality, politics, crime, and punishment, about all the hegemonic

                                      149
150                               Chapter 5



systems of society’s control. All fiction certainly communicates these mes-
sages through characters and their paradigmatic conflicts. However, in
popular fiction these messages often appear largely out of even the author’s
initial control. Little effective causality is demonstrated in the actions and
reflections of the characters. Surely all fictional characters are instru-
mentalized by authorial agendas to become materialists or monists or ironic
avatars of self-scrutiny. However, even within one subgenre, between
popular melodrama’s heroes such as Vito and Michael Corleone and an
elite melodrama character caught in a sensational plot such as Conrad’s
bemused and idealistic Axel Heyst in Victory (1915), there’s a great range
of characterization. Critical questions about such characterization always
center on which characters are chosen to reach the reader with what mes-
sages and what are the readerly consequences? In a study of The Godfather,
the question thus becomes how Puzo presumes to disclose his most vexing
moral issues.
       In popular fiction, this disclosure may be addressed through an analy-
sis of the fictional voice’s investiture as it contributes to the effect of the
narrative’s authority. What does it mean to discourse on morality through
murderers? On lawlessness through criminals? In a Macbeth or a
Raskolnikov, the answer is “absolutely everything,” as characters become
fully realized psychological, ideological, and aesthetic creations who chal-
lenge and satisfy an enormous audience over time through the moral and
emotional power of their representation. Furthermore, beginning with tragic
heroes in antiquity and biblical sinners in Christian parable, fictional and
dramatic narratives have always preferred “barbarous” knowledge to
any other kind. In the contemporary era, we are used to learning about
good and evil from putative villains who have become more interesting
to us than traditional heroes and have become heroes in what Philip
Fisher calls “the Romance of Consciousness” (98). Millions read best sellers
for instruction and edification, in line with the novel’s traditional duties,
as well as for all definitions of pleasure. At the same time, however,
modern and contemporary readers accede largely without protest to
identify with fictional outlaws of all persuasions, who, unquestionably,
one hundred years ago would have been cast in popular fiction’s outer
darkness of pulp and sensation tales. Elite fiction criticism’s take on these
issues is to warn about the impossibility of achieving instruction or edi-
fication at all, least of all in popular narrative, and to seek comfort at the
abyss where the pleasure is in knowing the vast impossibilities of know-
ing anything without attendant irony and further self-consciousness.
       Popular fiction is more direct in its approach and disclosure. The
rhetoric of popular fiction may be grasped by attempting an analysis of
its signification that contributes mightily to the rhetoric’s overall effect
on the reader. An analysis of the signification process exposes the inter-
play of rhetorical powers by which certain realities in the fiction are
revealed, as well as the text’s ground of social fact. I want to apply the
                             Barthes and Puzo                            151



dynamics of signification in key scenes involving Jack Woltz in The God-
father by reference to Barthes’ Mythologies and then speculate how an
extension of the climate of Woltz’s world determines much of the novel’s
representation of girls and women. Puzo’s text alternately raises a body
of issues about the Corleones and then masks or recontains them by
deflecting the reader’s attention from the Corleones toward other societal
agents. The Godfather can be seen in a familiar pattern whereby best sell-
ers often probe a wound on the surface of society, then numb the pain,
and appear to make all contradictions cease. Puzo’s pattern of selective
outrage and moralizing when convenient helps build a readerly consen-
sus about the heroism of the Corleones by making them “familiar” and
by making their enemies in the novel “other” or strange. The creation of
this pattern is negotiated through identities, first those of the Corleones
and their enemies, then extending to the pluralist identities of Godfather
readers and viewers. What this pattern of signification will show is that
no attitude or action can be negative if exemplified long enough by the
compelling Corleones; similarly, no outcry against their dominance, no
matter how demonstrably or objectively true, can survive in The Godfa-
ther if articulated through the discredited or the powerless.
      The Godfather is a particularly relevant text for Barthesian study.
Puzo’s novel anatomizes the American social and legal structure across
a wide range of family and business practices and situations. The
Corleone’s are a tightly knit group that settles its own scores and pros-
pers to great wealth. They care about the preservation of family and keep
a sober if secretive upper-middle-class profile in their compound-fortress
in the wilds of Long Island. On one level of wish-fulfillment, the Corleones
as Our Gang appear to be the prototype of togetherness in our collapsing
family structure, as close as the kitchen table, as powerful as the corpo-
ration; in the end, the family that murders together stays together, pro-
visionally after Michael Corleone’s “cleanup” at the end of Godfather I,
while in Godfather II, Michael’s crimes increase to fratricide; at the end of
Godfather III, his tragic melodrama culminates with his daughter’s death
on the steps of the opera house in Palermo, Sicily.
      The Corleones’ indirect flouting of every form of constituted Ameri-
can authority and societal norm puts the reader in the position of rooting
for the “good” murderers, the Corleones—because we come to know and
care about them—against the “bad” murderers, their enemies of whom
we know nothing except compromising flashes of impersonal brutality
and decadence.1 The Corleones operate more efficiently, swiftly, and in
accordance with their sense of justice than do all the legal and police
authority. Thus Puzo manages a potential crisis of reader identification
by priming them to agree with Don Corleone’s assessment: the system
has grievously failed its citizen-adherents; often no recourse exists; we
do not know where to turn in such circumstances. Never mind that the
Corleones could be perceived as the breakdown of the system itself. The
152                              Chapter 5



logic of The Godfather’s signification suggests that the Corleones repre-
sent the only alternative to a system of justice that has failed.
      The resultant signification of Don Corleone as heroic, omnipotent,
and well-nigh eternal is Puzo’s achievement, one that can be approached
and provisionally deconstructed so that other issues may be exposed.
Not the least of these issues is the uneasy response of reader-viewers to
the Corleone reign of terror—what if everyone acted that way?—the re-
sponse of those quintessential readers of Godfather power, Jack Woltz and
Kay Adams Corleone. What if everyone is the true nightmare disorder at
the heart of individualism. To describe how Puzo effects the manage-
ment of this powerful sentiment within a pluralist society that tentatively
but largely agrees on normative conduct, I want to adapt Barthes’ My-
thologies to provide critical tools for popular fiction study. Mythologies
collects his essays written for newspapers and magazines in the mid-
1950s when Barthes was “trying to reflect regularly on some myths of
French daily life” (Barthes 11). His overview to the 1970 edition explained
the “double theoretical framework” of his text: “on the one hand, an
ideological critique bearing on the language of so-called mass culture; on
the other, a first attempt to analyze semiologically the mechanics of this
language” (9). Barthes examined a wide variety of “collective represen-
tations” as “sign systems” from wrestling to margerine to plastic, from
the “writer on holiday” to “the face of Garbo” to “the brain of Einstein.”
He concluded with a long conceptual essay, “Myth Today,” which con-
stitutes an analytical tool most applicable to The Godfather. Barthes’s larg-
est aim was to “account in detail [emphasis Barthes] for the mystification
which transforms petit-bourgeois culture into a universal nature” (9).
Barthes considered this transformation the central facet of “ideological
abuse” in the ways in which the historical, the concrete, the political
were converted into essences that had reference to the natural, the eter-
nal, the unchanging, “the way things are.” Everywhere he perceived the
confusion of “history” and “nature” and the meretricious treatment of
the two in cultural discourse. Our postmodern awareness of the politics
of historicizing and naturalizing began in large measure due to Barthes’
landmark semiologics in Mythologies, which continued through Writing
Degree Zero (1968) and S/Z (1970).
      Barthes distrusts the easy equation of a physical state for an emo-
tional or moral one. His primary example is from Joseph Mankiewicz’s
film of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar (1953) in which sweat glistening on the
actors is equated with “moral feeling” and “Roman-ness” (26). Puzo’s
symbolizing all the way through The Godfather gives vivid evidence of
such equation. Michael Corleone’s face is shattered from a blow by a cor-
rupt New York City police captain. Again and again Puzo uses Michael’s
fractured appearance to suggest his “double nature.” One side of his face
looks cruel, hulking and swollen, “giving him the appearance of depravity
when viewed from that side” (Puzo 327). The other side is a classic profile
                             Barthes and Puzo                           153



(presumably of Romanness). Just so is Michael presented to the reader,
first as American war hero and then as hero of the Five Families War of
1946, which leads to his becoming the Don. Puzo establishes this inscrip-
tion of Michael’s duality and calls it “natural” on the level of the novel’s
action: a divided face is signifier of a signified divided nature between
good and evil. Rather than construct an aesthetic that might allow for a
featureless bland murderer or sainted physical monster, Puzo wants the
easily identifiable hybrid character visually marked as good/evil in the
broad melodrama. Puzo works in the same vein with Sonny Corleone,
who has a “gross Cupid’s face” (15, 27, 70, 245) and earns a reputation as
a violent family soldier and prodigious lover. The size of sexual organs is
a Puzo constant from Sonny’s “enormous blood-gorged pole of muscle”
(28) to Lucy Mancini’s large vagina. Sonny makes women swoon in antici-
patory fear, while Lucy lives in innocent self-disgust of her “ugliness.”
Puzo’s overt signifiers are emblematic of a staple of popular fiction in
which the nature of a character is presumed from physical facts that shade
toward the mythic in size or potency. No one would deny that a disfigured
face or genital abnormality would call up some version of “anatomy is
destiny” thematizing. What Barthes would label “reprehensible and de-
ceitful” (Barthes 28) is Puzo’s explaining in the guise of “the way things
are” some tacit thematic object.
       In addition to his basic physical coding, Puzo strives for metaphysi-
cal configurations that expose the limits of his conceptualization and
underscore the potential manipulation of his signification. A statement
variously expressed by both Kay Adams and Jack Woltz in The Godfather
is that if the Corleones are able to operate with impunity, “there couldn’t
be any kind of world if people acted that way” (Woltz) or “what if
everyone acted that way?” (Kay).2 This statement may be called a signi-
fied expressing a tentative democratic American consensus about the
consequences of individual lawlessness. It may also trigger more than
the trace of a resentful conviction in the reader that everyone is acting
that way and that then “I’d be a damn fool to act in any other way.”
“What if” might be posed subliminally as a question that an individual
reader might indeed ask (“what about it, eh? what sort of anarchic power
would that be?”). Genuine curiosity about possible answers to this ques-
tion proliferate in an American society in ever-more fluid discussion over
the construction of legitimation and authority within an identity-driven
pluralism.3 By locating several articulations of the “what if” sentiment in
the novel in The Godfather and then appraising the sites of utterance, their
narrative authority, and their cluster of messages, we can find how Puzo
credits and discredits character utterances on the “what if everyone”
issue and what historical and political questions are provoked by his
renderings? It is clear that “what if everyone” has both an individual and
moral collective register and is a complex question in any society’s dia-
logue about order and disorder. The constant exposure of such basic
154                               Chapter 5



conflicts of the social organism is the business of best sellers as they
deflect and defuse narratives that raise the largest of issues only to dis-
pose of them in premature conclusions and affirmation.4

      “What Kind of Man . . . What Sort of World?”

       Barthes begins “Myth Today” by stating that “myth is not defined
by the object of its message, but by the way in which it utters its mes-
sage . . .” (109). He places most of the act of critical interpretation on
divining the authority of the signifier. Language is adopted by a certain
predisposing subject, and the content, especially in a novel, is yoked to
a character or to a narrative voice in charge of the utterance. Barthes sees
“mythical speech” as “made of a material which has already been worked
on so as to make it suitable for communication”; the mythical speech
“presuppose[s] a signifying consciousness” (110), the message situated in
narrative so as to take on a logic of its own.5 Barthes’s leap from a linguis-
tic to a mythical structure is both organic and ingenious. He flatly states
that myth is a second-order semiological system but one that is catalyzed
by the linguistic sign: “that which is a sign (namely the associative total
of a concept and an image) in the first system, becomes a mere signifier
in the second” (114). Thus, Barthes sees (115),
              
                       1. Signiﬁer     2. Signiﬁed


Language ➡
             
                               3. Sign

                              I. SIGNIFIER                II. SIGNIFIED



Myth ➡ ➡
                                             III. SIGN




      How might this second-order system be adapted to the analysis of
fiction,6 in this case, Puzo’s The Godfather? Perhaps the novel’s scene most
vividly remembered from the first Godfather film does not feature one of
the myriad human victims but that of the stallion Khartoum’s severed
head lying in a pool of blood at the foot of Hollywood producer Jack
Woltz’s bed. Woltz has refused Tom Hagen’s “suggestion” to cast Johnny
Fontane in a major motion picture and suffers the inevitable consequences
of the Don’s displeasure. In this sensational and visceral scene, Woltz’s
                                Barthes and Puzo                                      155



first thoughts when he stops screaming concern the cash value of the
horse. He equates power with money in economic discourse: “[W]hat
kind of man could destroy an animal worth six hundred thousand dol-
lars?” (69) Then he extends his musings to a maxim saying that “the
ruthlessness, the sheer disregard for any values, implied a man who
considered himself completely his own law, even his own God” (69).
Puzo lets Woltz get right at it. Even this early in the novel, Woltz shows
he’s been an attentive if not particularly enlightened reader of the text’s
violence by concluding, “There couldn’t be any kind of world if people
acted that way. It was insane. It meant that you couldn’t do what you
wanted with your own money, with the companies you owned, the power
you had to give orders. It was ten times worse than Communism. It had
to be smashed. It must never be allowed” (69).
       Puzo is clear enough on the specific viewpoint of Woltz who asks
that this “it,” this Corleone anarchy out of feudalism visited upon him,
be checked by some limits, an order that should prevail over freedom
and license. An apostle of American capitalism and its licenses, he cannot
see past power and money in the implications of his statement. Puzo
crucially allows Woltz, Don Corleone’s capitalist double from the larger
society, to review the Godfather’s power, aims, and consequences from
a dominant Cold War paradigm (“ten times worse than communism”)
that demands retaliation. Popular fiction does not often allow for such
checkpoints and reflective anger on systems because the narrative must
continue to hurtle forward in sensation and melodrama. Yet Woltz’s
analysis is exactly where the reader-critic should stop, according to Barthes,
for as Bakhtin reminds us, the activity of a character in a novel is always
ideologically demarcated (The Dialogic Imagination 335). Woltz as a site of
crisis both exposes and drives exploitation underground in his private
dissent. Woltz says rules are rules, procedures in America that allow him
to operate as capitalist predator. If we apply Barthes’ diagram like a grid
over the dynamics of Woltz’s reasoning, we have the following:
                      1. Signiﬁer           2. Signiﬁed
                        Woltz saying,        Moral questions



Language ➡
                    “There couldn’t be
                       any world if . . .”


                                     3. Sign
                                                 about
                                              Don Corleone




                                I. SIGNIFIER
                                 Woltz moralizing
                                                                   II. SIGNIFIED
                                                                Relations of Morality to
                                                                Personal Freedom and


Myth ➡ ➡
                                                   III. SIGN
                                                                         Justice


                                     Woltz—articulated outrage on behalf of
                                       American capitalist individualism.
156                               Chapter 5



      The key point in my adaptation of Barthes’s diagram is the shift
when the Woltz-articulated sentiments change from being the linguistic
sign and become the mythical signifier at the outset of the second-order
semiological operation. The mythical signified is where the reader-critic
begins to imply his or her own content, what Barthes categorizes as a
confusing welter of opinions, goals, values, and relations that are actu-
ally our own emotional castes, mind sets, and personal experiences and
contribute to whatever “taste” judgments we make of any artistic cre-
ation.7 These are dictated through our gender, temperament, education,
social class, and political philosphy (Barthes 119). Although now we’d add
race, ethnicity, age, and sexual preference, Barthes’s inclusive list holds up
remarkably well more than four decades later to describe reality perspec-
tively formed by readers and the processes by which we affiliate. These
associations work to make up what Barthes calls the “concept” in the
mythical signified, what I would call both our yearnings and identifica-
tions toward “the good life” (Barthes mentions richness, kindness, and
wholeness (121)) that influence our interpretation; our response is shaped
here with regard to the most inclusive subject we can then frame and ask:
what does “Woltz-articulated outrage on behalf of American capitalist in-
dividualism” mean? Barthes is correct to see the signified/concept open to
the “whole of history” (120), which must include our own personal histo-
ries as we negotiate our priorities in a pluralist society. Furthermore, we
encode our signifieds in collective formations through liberal procedural
values that will enhance the possibility of their achievement.8
      Barthes sees the signified/concept as rich while the signifier/form
is “a repository of rarefied meaning” (120), making its choice by the
author all the more crucial. Barthes finds an abundance of forms but few
concepts, which are more universal. Also, forms may be characters, voices,
or statements. Concepts may include beauty versus ugliness, truth ver-
sus lies, and goodness versus evil as we strive to give shape to our own
subjectivizing reactions and touchstones that yield our views of freedom
and value. In Woltz’s utterance of the concept “there couldn’t be any
kind of world if everyone acted that way,” is his own subjective history.
By “Woltzing” around with it, Puzo has made what looks like an inevi-
table yoking of character and outrage. The mythical signification is then
exactly “Woltz-articulated outrage” as it interacts with relations of mo-
rality and systems of value such as civic and financial order and becomes
allied with patriotic sentiment: “it [Corleone rapacity] was ten times worse
than communism” (69). Such a new signification is heavily ideological
because Woltz, as we shall see, represents discredited and discounted
checks and balances in the American system. To undo “Woltz-articulated
outrage” is to begin to gauge the inevitable distortion of any signifier;
but to answer “what sort of world?” we must first ask, what sort of
man/signifier is Woltz who moralizes? on our way to asking what sort
of writer is Puzo who has a Woltz moralize?
                             Barthes and Puzo                            157



      One last Barthesian set of distinctions is very useful in seeing how
Puzo has positioned Woltz’s in The Godfather’s symbology. Barthes focues
on three different types of reading, which must be differentiated to grasp
what he calls the “duplicity” of the signifier. These focuses are the Empty,
Full, and Mythical Signifiers. They could be labeled the signifiers of the
author (Empty), critic (Full) and reader (Mythical). In Woltz’s case, the
author, Puzo, wishes to signify the omnipotence of Don Corleone. “Woltz
moralizing” is an example of that omnipotence; he is a symbol for it after
his devastating horse lesson from the great Don as to who has the real
power. The critic’s task with the full signifier is to distinguish once again
between the form and the meaning, to expose the full form of the signi-
fication. The critic may see “Woltz moralizing” as the alibi of Corleone
omnipotence, the distorted imprimatur sanctioning the correct decision
made by Don Corleone to take action against him. The mythical signifier
is the reader’s form as he or she receives a union of meaning and form.
“Woltz moralizing” reflects the very presence of Corleone power; his
devastation as an assimilationist Hollywood loudmouth is the object-
lesson. The reader hurtles on to the next example of family power, hav-
ing acknowledged, yes, Don Corleone is omnipotent, and Woltz got what
he deserved. No distortion or localizing element impedes the reader.
Whereas the Empty and Full Signifiers are static in the sense of arrest, the
Empty is (in Barthes’s terms) “cynical” and the Full “demystifying.” The
focusing through the Mythical Signifier by the reader is “dynamic, it
consumes the myth according to the very ends built into its structure”
(Barthes 128). “Woltz moralizing” appears to “naturally” call up indigna-
tion and then Puzo “naturally” disposes of him.
      However, a Barthesian analysis would only begin there. Because
Woltz has been severely discredited in advance, his signification as the
locus of societal outrage is cancelled by prior significations. Hence, Puzo
lets readers know they need not worry about what has been done to this
victim and, by implication, to any Corleone victim. If Woltz is to be at the
center of a major statement on American values, Puzo has insured that
reader response to him will be negative because Woltz, potential ethnic
double as power magnate to the Don, is nonetheless the antithesis of Don
Corleone in every detail that could matter to the reader. At age ten Woltz
had “hustled empty beer kegs and pushcarts” on the East Side in New
York, and at age twenty “he helped his father sweat garment workers”;
yet he has remained neither in New York nor in a family business. A
movie pioneer in Hollywood, he transformed himself socially by taking
speech lessons and learning dress and manners from an English valet
and butler. He marries an actress, collects master paintings, serves on
Presidential committees; “his daughter married an English lord, his son
an Italian princess” (55–56). This cacophony of signs portrays an assimi-
lated American tycoon with tantalizing, undeveloped ethnic accents (“his
son [married] an Italian princess) who has fragmented his strengths to take
158                              Chapter 5



up a position in the larger American society where he can threaten to call
up his “friend” J. Edgar Hoover if Tom Hagen puts pressure on him.
“Woltz moralizing” is a corporate America loudly protesting that its pro-
tection from such criminals as the Corleones is its due for playing the
American game as opposed to the ethnic identity game of the Corleones.
Woltz is totally isolated in his huge mansion; his is not the Corleone com-
pound on Long Island with spaghetti in every pot and “family” members
in every bungalow. To Tom Hagen, Woltz’s office is full of “shrewdies,”
not trusted subordinates personally indentured to him.
       However, it is not enough for Puzo to run Woltz through this col-
lective register of negatives. He must also discredit him intimately through
his sexuality. The Don is “notoriously straitlaced in matters of sex” (73),
and this fact is the moral control that Puzo invokes when it pleases him.
Woltz, on the other hand, has “real love in his voice” when he croons to
his horse, Khartoum. That Khartoum’s blood fouls Woltz’s bed hints that
Woltz’s simulated bestiality is realized in the animal’s murder. In case the
reader doesn’t get it, Puzo has Hagen see a child star stumble from Woltz’s
mansion, “her exquisitely cut mouth seemed to have smeared into a thick
pink mass. . . . her long legs tottered like a crippled foal” (63).9 Woltz—
horse lover, child seducer, friend of Hoover, American success story—is a
thoroughly discredited figure before he utters his cry for checks and bal-
ances in a pluralist America. Yet he knows none himself and has commit-
ted three major sins in The Godfather: he has denied his ethnic origins,
become “Americanized,” and been sexually deviant. The three signifieds
merge into an indictment that makes Woltz’s outrage a sham contrivance
to the critical reader and strongly undermines the potentially idealized
message of “there couldn’t be any kind of world if.”
       Puzo insures Woltz’s downfall when he remains impervious to Tom
Hagen’s attempt at dialogue as discussed in chapter 4: “the guy was
taking his words at their sentimental face value. He was not getting the
message” (63). Woltz here is a bad reader of the Godfather, but readers
as myth consumers of The Godfather perform a different activity as read-
ers of “Woltz moralizing” as a mythical signifier. His words are not taken
at their face value, and he is the message. Given a choice, there is little
doubt that the reader will identify not with Woltz as victim or as a moral
questioner of this text but with another victory by Don Corleone, whose
power appears universal. Woltz’s power is merely political and tempo-
ral, compromised and specific. Here Puzo performs a contemptuous
politicizing in the service of eternalizing. Woltz significantly parses out
most of his reactions in an interior monologue and “laughs wildly” (70)
at his own conclusions. He has no real dialogized existence and is totally
isolated by Puzo except through manipulation in authorial statement.
       As Barthes points out, “myth transforms history into nature.” In
Barthes’s terms, Don Corleone’s power is “frozen into something natural;
it is not read as a motive, but as a reason” (129). The myth consumer may
                               Barthes and Puzo                             159



renounce Woltz’s pain and protest since it is inimical to his prior signi-
fication as assimilationist, American, and deviant. Thus “Woltz moraliz-
ing” is canceled through his negative historicization and “naturally” calls
up the concept of Corleone omnipotence. Here the mythologist may in-
tervene to challenge the author’s cover-up. At this juncture, an ethical
reading suggests itself, one that carries the weight of the collective society’s
liberal consensus. To open the signified/concept to the “whole of his-
tory” (Barthes 120) is to posit something like the following: the Mafia is
a natural, eternal force dislocates it as an historical and political entity
that has been created in time and could be addressed as a culture-specific
evil. To privilege Woltz as outraged victim belies the real victims of
Corleone power in the novel who are never seen, the whole marginalized
and buried culture of deprivation, weakness, and desire (gambling, pros-
titution, addiction, extortion) upon which the Corleone empire is built.
We only see the beleaguered family responding to specific evils and
provocations by their murderous peers in Puzo’s drive to keep the novel
on course as melodrama of family life and death.10
      Puzo, at his most distressingly cosmic, reasons that Don Corleone
helped people “not perhaps out of cunning or planning but because of his
variety of interests or because of the nature of the universe, the interlinking
of good and evil, natural of itself” (392). The contingent, fabricated histori-
cal quality of Corleone terror, the murder and the pillage, is laundered into
a natural force against which Woltz is worse; Kay is a woman; and police,
courts, and politicians are subject to mortal error because they are “made
up” in civil society, not natural. Puzo has stacked the narative against them
or willfully left them uncreated. He has turned reality inside out, turned
a horse-loving child seducer into a moralizer. Woltz as signifier cannot
survive the prior pressure toward his discrediting. Puzo here has turned
the narrative against fiction itself. He has chosen, in Bakhtin’s terms, a
single-voiced myth over dialogization. Woltz’s signification stands in sharp
contrast to the positive restating by the Don and Michael that “there couldn’t
be any kind of world if.” As opposed to Woltz’s protest, the Don dies in
the “shade of his . . . patio,” whispering, “Life is so beautiful” (409), and
Michael dissembles oxymoronically to Kay about “the good simple life of
well-to-do Americans” (363). Such falsely affirming moments calm and
reassure the Godfather reader that its first family knows what’s really im-
portant. Woltz, however, goes unheard and decidedly punished. So much
for Puzo destroying through negative agency a massive signified about the
balances of a pluralist society.


                     Naturalizing the Signifier

      Naturalizing the signifier counters specific politicizing and creates
inevitable tensions in any fiction. In “Myth Today,” Barthes is frustrated
160                              Chapter 5



to the point where he asks, “Is there no meaning which can resist this
capture with which form threatens it?” (131). This question dominates
the conclusion of Mythologies, where Barthes contends we are “condemned
to speak excessively about reality” (159), to either “ideologize” or “poet-
ize.” He could not in Mythologies posit a reconciliation between these
strategies, and the succeeding decades have proved him correct in the
contentious evolution of contemporary critical theories. Woltz was ide-
ologized by Puzo in order to be poetized as villain. His specific associa-
tions with the American system and with a deviant sexuality are created
only to cancel him as a spokesman for victimization by the Don. Here is
the problem for all fictional narrative where meaning must come through
a signifier, either a character zone or a narrative voice identified through
its accents with the author. The inevitable situatedness of fictional mes-
sages marks the contingency of all novelistic statement. The content of
the message uttered by Woltz takes on the greatest of its implications
through Woltz as form. The mythical signifier “Woltz moralizing” has
specific marked properties. To ideologize them on the critic’s part is to
reinvent content that the text may suppress or leave unexpressed. In
this vein in The Godfather, Don Corleone’s real victims may be invoked in
their absence. The question of the Don’s relation to the organized Catho-
lic church, a key suppressed text in the novel, could then be discussed
as Puzo’s necessary evasive action to protect the omnipotence of
his protagonist.11
      On the other hand, to “poetize” is to search for inalienable mean-
ings on levels beyond the narrative. This search is everywhere inimical
to the artifact being examined in popular culture study. Such strategies
propose value judgments about “common humanity” and “individual
freedom,” to name two of the most popular signifieds in the lexicon of
practical literary criticism that flow from a pluralist society’s deepest
beliefs and goals. For a number of reasons, such signifieds now carry the
burden of being labeled elitist in their “naturalized” form. Popular fic-
tion critics are moved to restore the ideological component to texts even
as elite fiction critics are moved to poetize what they deem to be complex
texts about social and cultural issues, often to the exclusion of such is-
sues. To break into Puzo’s attempts at universalizing in a melodramatic
novel such as The Godfather is to attempt to restore the historical and
narrative contradictions that gave rise to its sonorous, concealing surface
in the first place. It is to become Humean in the extreme, to locate sites
of feeling such as Woltz’s lament and block Puzo’s rhetoric with senti-
mental response of equal feeling that the author has gotten it wrong, that
“Woltz moralizing” cuts bad corners indeed.
      Fiction has a naturalness of the very text that is combed for univer-
sals. What is made to look natural in The Godfather is, in the Woltz ex-
ample, a prior coding of the signifier. This coding is inescapable if
utterances are to be in the province of characters but need not be so
                              Barthes and Puzo                             161



blatantly at cross-purposes with the morality of the signified as in Woltz’s
speech. The more coherence between the signifier and the signified,
whether achieved symbolically, rhetorically, or ironically, the greater the
achievement of the author is said to be. What constitutes this coherence
fuels the widest possible range of debate among critical methods and
individual critics.12 How this coherence might relate to an ethics of fiction
as well as a poetics is an even larger question.
      In S/Z (1974), Barthes is more congenial toward the naturalizing
process, seeing it as an inevitable component of the production of mean-
ing rather than an inherently reductive feature. Barthes finally asks if any
sentence, whatever meaning it releases, doesn’t appear to be telling us
something simple, literal, and primitive, something true” (S/Z 9). In S/Z,
“denotation” replaces “naturalizing” as “the old deity, watchful, cun-
ning, theatrical, foreordained to represent the collective innocence of lan-
guage” (9). Here Barthes’s linguistic configuration shades remarkably
close to a description of Don Corleone himself, shaping any specific
message into an articulation of his power; he is a deity, in producing
gestural performance in bella figura and full of “cunning,” Puzo’s favorite
noun of praise for any character. If Puzo has inscribed a mythical center
of power beyond which no other fictional dialogue may flourish in his
novel, the corollary must be that his critics also naturalize as soon as they
isolate his language for analysis. To snip out any text segment as in the
Woltz examples under discussion here or the Genco–Don Corleone dia-
logue analyzed at length in chapter 3, is to arrest the narrative at a
second-order level, that of multiple levels of critical scrutiny. As soon as
we perform any critical act, we have substituted a further naturalization
and have created a deformed text of examples in our own narrative.13
      Barthes’ largest point is, of course, that as soon as we utter, we
naturalize. Barthes finally matures the “natural” into something like the
inescapable base of the narrative: “paradoxically, language, the integral
system of meaning, is employed to de-systematize the secondary mean-
ings, to naturalize their production and to authenticate the story” (S/Z
23). “Connotation” is the wealth that Barthes invests in S/Z in terms of
semes to be identified and combined. The connotations are quick, extrin-
sic acknowledgements and citations rather than the close-reading, second-
order politicizing of Mythologies. In what he calls the “classic” or “readerly”
text, Barthes concludes that the author moves from signified to signifier
(what do I want to say, whom shall I find to say it). The author is “god”
of the signifier, the critic is “priest,” deciphering the full signifier and
working back toward content (174). A signifier becomes a rich collection
of semes. Thus Woltz could be called a “point of convergence” for power,
authority, decadence, [il]legtimacy, and order: “the proper name enables
the person to exist outside the semes whose sum nonetheless constitutes
it entirely” (191). Their proper names throughout the American elite and
popular canon could be Hester, Uncle Tom, Huck, Gatsby, Scarlett, or
162                              Chapter 5



Sethe, names that mythically take on a set of characteristics and
convergences that allow the characters to float as ambassadors with criti-
cal portfolio toward other characters, texts, and eras, seeking answering
words and embodying powerful significations.


      Jack Woltz’s Stable: Khartoum and the Girls

       Woltz himself is a site for much bad-faith moralizing about Ameri-
can capitalism, its power, rights, and privileges. Radiating out from Woltz’s
Hollywood empire as a model of that capitalism is also a set of signifi-
cations that involve the marketing and abuse of women, Hollywood’s
major capital asset, as it controls the sexual dream world of American
culture. Much of the absolute male power of the Corleones is segmented
sharply off and away from female eyes and influence. However, the
Hollywood world of Jack Woltz, the anti–Don Corleone, is founded al-
most solely on the business of trading in women. This implication and
inability to separate male and female spheres dooms Woltz’s influence in
the novel as surely as his refusal of the Don’s offer on behalf of Johnny
Fontane. For women in The Godfather become essences, colors, animals,
ripe or rotting fruit, virginal New Englanders, shrews, spoiled “guinea”
daughters, old crones, Hollywood bitch wives who are “out fucking.”
Barthes writes that “what is sickening in myth is the resort to a false
nature . . . as in these objects which decorate their usefulness with a natu-
ral appearance. The will to weigh the signification with the full guaran-
tee of nature causes a kind of nausea: myth is too rich, and what is in
excess is precisely its motivation” (126). We need to examine, as best we
can, Puzo’s “motivation” in signifying the Godfather women.
       Women in The Godfather are characteristically both too rich and too
instrumental to the male plot to really live on their own. The way they
function as mythical signifiers is, first, to deny them agency and then to
build sensationally on physical attributes or economic functions. None of
this is exactly news in popular fiction. However, Woltz Productions is at
the heart of this narrative and re-creates something like Woltz’s desiring
imagination. The most imposing sexual animal in The Godfather is Woltz’s
stallion, Khartoum, whom Woltz croons to like a lover, admiring his
“great brown eyes” which “glinted like golden apples, the black skin
over the taut body was silk.” Woltz proudly tells Hagen, “Look at that
cock on him. I should have such a cock” (60). Thus while the Don has his
mythically endowed son Sonny as lieutenant and heir, Woltz has a male
horse that dies savagely and its head placed in his bed, the same bloody
bed, it is presumed, where Woltz violated the twelve-year-old girl starlet,
the “crippled foal” with her “mouth smeared into a pink mass,” “whose
sea-blue eyes were filmed over” whom Hagen watches stumble to the
car outside Woltz’s mansion. The Don “murmurs ‘infamita’ ” (66) when
                             Barthes and Puzo                            163



told of Woltz’s action. Sonny is hung like Khartoum and slaughtered like
him as well; his cock is alive in Lucy Mancini’s hand, where “it pulsated
in her hand like an animal” (28). Lucy herself has a sexual “deformity”
to be rectified: a large vagina caused by a weakening of the pelvic floor.
This cluster of sexual organ sizings in horses, men, women, and girls is
clearly confusing. Is Woltz homosexual in orientation? Is Sonny no more
than an animal? Is Lucy a vagina in soft core fantasy? Does the young
girl starlet only exist to be raped by Woltz? Is Khartoum another inno-
cent victim?
      Girls and women are used across a direct, visceral, and reductive
field of signification in The Godfather. The description thickens rather than
the plot. A scene from the novel not used by Coppola concerns a Woltz
side enterprise, the euphemistically named “Hollywood Movie Star Lonely
Hearts Club” (182), a Friday evening affair hosted by Woltz’s press agent
at which aging star actresses who had “been desensitized physically”
and could “no longer ‘fall in love’ ” or assume the role of “hunted women”
could prey on younger lovers in Woltz-approved one-night stands. Rather
than “raced” (given movie roles) like Khartoum, these women are put
out to stud, servicing and being serviced by younger male actors, pre-
sumably for practice and their upward (no pun) mobility in the ranks.
The scene is hardly one of a brothel or an orgy. The house and grounds
comprise a movie set, which features patio lighting “artfully arranged to
flatter feminine faces and skin.” The seductions take place in a well-
appointed screening room where each aging star has her own couch and
younger lover in dark “semi-privacy.” The fiction decrees that a movie be
up on the screen as each young stud is serviced in the dark (a working
definition of Hollywood film intent) by the female star who might until
recently have been the on-screen fantasy. This funny and nasty little conceit
shows Puzo in a rare comic moment of control; it’s our neighborhood
Italian fella, Nino Valenti, now on the loose with Johnny in Hollywood,
who is taken through his paces by one Deanna Dunn, who makes “a
voracious plummet on his sexual organ without even a courteous and
friendly word of preparation” (185). When Deanna comes up for air, and
Nino is working on a fresh drink and cigarette, he cracks, “This looks
like a pretty good movie.” When she admires him for being “big as a
house,” he shrugs her off, saying, “That’s the way it always is. You should
see it when I get excited” (186).
      Here Puzo has moved into a jaunty rendition of Nathanael West’s
Hollywood in a relaxed mode that Hollywood often signifies for him. He
is almost off-duty in the satiric sketch about Nino in movie sex heaven.
Hollywood is out beyond the straitlaced Corleones in sensibility and
sexual preference. Johnny and Nino are at play in the sexual fantasy
world that Hollywood demonstrably is producing all the time and that
popular narrative almost establishes as the predominant reality. This more
contemporary text dangles in The Godfather in 1969 where it’s Jack Woltz’s
164                              Chapter 5



viciousness that is the main line of the novel’s sexual development, not
this satirical sideshow, and Puzo revisits this sexual Hollywood in both
Fools Die and The Last Don. However, in The Godfather, the critical advice
is to follow the line out from Woltz, who not only signifies degenerate
sexuality himself (bestiality, child rape) but who controls American pro-
duction of sexuality on film. For Puzo to really say something about this
fact beyond its mere representation is well beyond his conceptual agenda
for Woltz as Hollywood double for the Don.
      The Godfather’s “positive” or “innocent” portrayals of women in-
clude Johnny Fontane’s daughters and the Girls of Sicily, including
Michael’s great love, Apollonia. However, the jumble of symbolism and
putative links to Khartoum make an incoherent cluster of statements
about women and their victimization. The reader is forced to conclude
that for Puzo, sexuality and its representation are charged, but not intel-
ligible, visceral without viewpoint, and heedless as to which feminine
body is on display for what sensational or sentimental reason. Without
a viewpoint, ironic or otherwise, the women in The Godfather are the
strongest examples of reading for the mythical signifier, for “consum[ing]
the myth according to the very ends built into its structure” for using
women up as readerly capital in the way they are used by the men in the
narratives themselves. Their ornamentation, which is made to look natu-
ral or in essence female, is a stew of innocence revered and defiled, of
explosive sex between organs, not people, and of the victimization such
moments inevitably yield. None of this struggle and pain appears to
have concerned Puzo very much; as Nino said at the “Lonely Hearts
Club,” it “look[ed] like a pretty good movie.”
      Two young girls putatively outside the Woltz stable of sexual en-
ergy are Johnny Fontane’s daughters who are kept in virginal simplicity
by their mother for Johnny’s occasional notice and favor. Yet Puzo can’t
seem to keep sexual signification out of his scene. On one of Johnny’s
infrequent visits home (one of Puzo’s great bourgeois fantasies, of “drop-
ping in occasionally” and finding dinner on the table, the kids dressed
and shining, and the wife all attentive), his “two small daughters” wheel
a breakfast cart to his bed in the middle of the afternoon: “They were so
beautiful it broke his heart. Their faces were shining and clear, their eyes
alive with curiosity and the eager desire to run to him. They wore their
hair braided old-fashioned in long pigtails and they wore old-fashioned
frocks and white patent leather shoes.” These signifiers of tradition and
innocence stashed somewhere in the middle of Woltz’s Hollywood, per-
haps called up by central casting for an antiquated family picture, are
kept by Johnny’s ex-wife in perfect genteel order, recalling Sicilian girls
dressed for a holiday. Yet the scene changes when “they came running to
him. He pressed his face between their two fragrant cheeks and scraped
them with his beard so that they shrieked” (165). In another author, this
fuzzy friction of a famous lover-father in bed between two young girls’
                             Barthes and Puzo                           165



“cheeks” who “were too old now for pillow fights or to be tossed around”
could be very suggestive at the least or grimly revealing. Puzo, who
signifies for the plot, not for psychological depth or grim irony, sees
Johnny Fontane as the “romantic, old-fashioned guinea” reveling in his
daughters’ “freshness.” Johnny’s daughters are the nonsexual counter-
part to the virgins he takes for sex. For Johnny without his voice (read
masculinity), “the last two years had been hell on his ego, and he used
this simple way to restore it, sleeping with a fresh young girl for one
night . . . and then brushing her off” (158). In this way Puzo shows us a
rather sad man, incapable of differentiating between dewy starlets and
his own daughters and nostalgic for the original cleanliness of it all—
clean phrasing in singing, clean young bodies. Johnny “smooth[es] their
mussed hair” and thinks of the “Hollywood punks” who will soon be
after them (166), failing, of course, to place himself in that category.
      It doesn’t occur to Puzo that Johnny has some defect in his relation
to women, only that he’s shy, victimized, and nostalgic, which is Puzo’s
signature dreamy vein where male musing on the feminine is concerned.
Armed with psychology, elite critical reading patterns, and a moral skep-
ticism, the reader can conclude that Woltz and Johnny Fontane are equal in
depravity, the one in gusto as a villain, the other in soft denial, but that
would not be Puzo’s message. In each case, that of Woltz’s twelve-year-old
starlet with the torn mouth and Johnny’s giggling daughters of the same
age in daddy’s bed, the reader is not asked to connect the dots but rather
to acknowledge in popular fictional plot logic that the raped girl starlet
makes Woltz bad and pigtailed daughters in bed make Johnny good. What’s
evident in both scenes is that Puzo contrives to get the older man into bed
with young girls. We read that Woltz is “a raging wolf ravaging helpless
flocks of young starlets”; we know Johnny is in thrall to young women. Yet
Puzo won’t give the material any internal dialogism; there’s no arresting
of the mythical signifier (“Woltz raping,” “Johnny as loving father”) to
consider the consequences of an older man’s love of young girls nor what
is Hollywood’s role in addressing and fostering such desire in the culture.
The most that can be said for Puzo is his desire for a weak or casual irony
in the two presentations. He’s more interested in his grand comedy: the
Brothel of Overaged Stars. Any concern about sexual violation and exploi-
tation vanishes in the reader’s smile at Nino’s wisecracks, in the reader’s
applause as Woltz gets his just equine desserts.
      At this point, the reader of this chapter might wonder if she is now
to endure an attack of umbrage about the animal rights violations in
Khartoum’s portrayal. There is, to be sure, a level beyond which a critic’s
hammering at an author’s depiction of character and characters obscures
the actual authorial purpose in such quick and extrinsic character por-
trayal. Yet no woman in The Godfather is given more than a violent, ex-
ternal, or mythical brushstroke. Kay is a New England Adams, Apollonia
a fawn, Mama Corleone a wrinkled old crone, Connie Corleone a shrew
166                              Chapter 5



in training, Lucy Mancini a vagina. Such perfunctory characterization is,
however, in line with melodrama’s need to shuffle the emotional inten-
sities around rather than provide release, mastery, or insight, to elicit the
desired emotional response from the audience. Popular fiction does not
give the reader a reason for, or point toward, a structure where a thought-
ful pause to consider Woltz raping the twelve year old will give any
more insight to Johnny Fontane breakfasting in bed with his daughters.
Consuming the myth dictates that the reader experience Woltz as de-
praved and Johnny as innocent or, as Barthes says “live the myth as a
story at once true and unreal” (128).
       When Michael is exiled to Sicily and meets the “thunderbolt” that
is Apollonia, Puzo again essentializes her portrayal, this time to signify
a mythic female Sicilianness. The images could be taken from a child’s
myth picture book, a lush commercial travel guide, or a garish foreign
cinematic copy of Hollywood “epic”-ness dubbed into English. This young
Sicilian goddess is glimpsed in the fields with her friends: “[T]hey were
still in their teens but with the full womanliness sun-drenched flesh rip-
ened into so quickly. Three or four of them started chasing one girl
[Apollonia], chasing her toward the grove. The girl being chased held a
bunch of huge purple grapes in her left hand. . . . She had a crown of
ringleted hair as purple black as the grapes and her body seemed to be
bursting out of its skin” (333). Apollonia is “delicious ripe fruit” (345)
even as the overaged stars in Hollywood had been “wax fruit” (184).
What’s more disturbing is Apollonia’s strong resemblance to Woltz’s stal-
lion, Khartoum. The horse had “great brown eyes glint[ing] like golden
apples” and the “black skin over the taut body was silk” (60). Apollonia
with the aforementioned purple black hair has “honey-colored skin” and
“huge brown eyes”; her signature is “silk”: Puzo uses the word in numb-
ing succession in the same page (“silky naked skin,” “silken electricity,”
“her flesh and hair taut silk” [344]). Like Johnny’s daughters, she has “a
wonderfully fresh smell” (345). However, like Khartoum, she is destroyed
as Michael’s wife and property, a beautiful sensuous animal blown to
bits in revenge against the Corleones. Did Puzo understand Apollonia’s
close resemblance to Khartoum, and if so, what did he make of it and
what should the reader do with the doubling? The most potent and
similarly described desirable objects in the novel are the male horse of
the rapist villain and the Sicilian dream girl of the novel’s hero. Once
more, a potential for some radical conception of desire and retribution
exists, but Puzo doesn’t link the scenes in any way.
       In similar fashion, Puzo doesn’t connect other potential doubling
scenes. Lucy Mancini, whom Puzo actually likes, is described at the
Corleone wedding as “this young girl, fully aware . . . at a garden table
in her pink formal gown, a tiara of flowers in her glossy black hair” (16).
Innocent Lucy is only pages away from Sonny’s “enormous blood-gorged
pole of muscle” (28) and a sister to Woltz’s violated girl with her “exquis-
                             Barthes and Puzo                           167



itely cut,” “raspberry-red mouth” turned into a “pink mass” (55, 63).
However, any notion of equating Sonny’s “rape” for Lucy’s “pleasure”
with Woltz’s abuse of the girl is not in Puzo’s semantic row; the two
scenes pass on the visceral power of Sonny and the decadence of Woltz.
What’s most probable is that Puzo had a limited repertoire of violent and
desiring rhetoric and images, that violence and sex were bound for him
in a way that he did not or would not investigate, that his own art was
not to decode or deconstruct his desiring imagination but to simply re-
peat it over and over in the novel’s urgent moments.
       Such a hypothesis might be proven by one other improbable link in
this signifying chain—the description of the death of the human weap-
ons system known as Luca Brasi, the Corleone’s most feared executioner,
the unreconstructed Sicilian brute whom Sollozzo and Tattaglia lure to
his death to smooth the way for their attack on Don Corleone. Luca’s
wrists are pinned, and a “thin silken chord” is wound round his neck; his
face “became purple,” his “eyes were bulging out of his head” (111),
reminiscent of the “mottled, dead hemorrhaged blood” in Khartoum’s
dead eyes (68) or the “sea blue eyes filmed over” (63) in Woltz’s girl.
Luca is worse than Woltz for he has murdered both his infant child and
its mother. This New York anecdote told by an old woman fills the space
between Michael and Apollonia’s wedding and her assassination. “Silken”
and “purple,” Luca in death resembles Apollonia as well as Khartoum,
and the link between them is extraordinary bodily value, either sexual or
violent, the currency of the book’s economy. Luca, Apollonia, and
Khartoum become physical markers of the stakes involved. These are the
weavings of the literary critic because Puzo only knows one way to write
about violence and sex together, forcing him to fall back on the same
rhetoric so that the descriptions merge but do not clarify.14
       One more silk reference intrigues and is related to Connie Corleone,
prized only daughter of the Godfather, a “not quite pretty girl, thin and
nervous” (19) on her wedding day while the bridegroom’s Carlo Rizzi’s,
“eyes kept flickering toward the huge silk purse the bride wore on her
right shoulder” (20). Connie’s money, not her body, is silk, but by possess-
ing the purse (more valuable than Lucy’s vagina), Carlo goes for the money.
Does Puzo want to equate Connie’s silk purse with the bodily silk of
Khartoum and Apollonia? No evidence supports the pattern; rather a taxed
vocabulary and repetitive image seem more to the point. One can only
guess how many “silk purses” have been made out of novelists’ “sows’
ears” over the decades by intrepid critics whose business is making mean-
ing and pattern, but the logic of melodrama says onward rather than “re-
flect on this set of correspondences for awhile.” However, Puzo’s missed
chances or connections can only be mourned by critical readers. Woltz’s
“protege” whom Johnny “ruined,” the starlet who precipitates the whole
crisis with Johnny Fontane, is not even named. What if the child Luca Brasi
murdered along with its mother, “a young pretty girl who looked Irish”
168                               Chapter 5



(347) had been allowed to live and had grown up to be Tom Hagen?
Hagen’s Italian wife is a “college graduate, “ “rare at that time” (52), but
she merits only a line or two before disappearing. What would be her
ethnic and educated take on the novel’s carnage? Could she be a potential
Octavia from The Fortunate Pilgrim or an ally or rival for female articulation
along with Kay? Finally, Jack Woltz’s son “married an Italian princess”
(56), but to what end? Why even provide the titillation for the reader if that
particular gun is not going to go off in the novel? This ethnic marking of
“Irish” and “Italian” women appears heedless and without follow-up. The
throwaway Irish girl, female Italian college grad and Mafia wife, and Ital-
ian princess are potentially more interesting female characters than Kay,
Lucy, and Apollonia, but they are barely introduced. When expectations on
simple character marking and consequence are frustrated, the critic can
say with reasonable certainty that interlocking patterns of ethnicity and
ironic doubling are beyond the author’s capability or interest, as, in this
case is any careful representation of any female character in the most to-
tally male world in the history of the American blockbuster best seller.15


                     The God of Immanence

      So Jack Woltz has a horse instead of Don Corleone’s three sons, a
twelve-year-old girl instead of a wife. Instead of honoring his ethnic
father, he jokes to Hagen that perhaps one of his grandmothers was
raped by a cossack (60). However, it’s not the sex that shocks Hagen but
the fact that sex consumes Woltz’s time and affects his business judg-
ment. “In Hagen’s world, the Corleones’ world, the physical beauty, the
sexual power of women carried not the slightest weight in worldly
matters” (62), thus establishing a residual moralism that frees the reader
to root for the Corleones, damn Woltz, and enjoy the Hollywood sex
follies, all at the same time. Woltz pedals the old, seduces the young, and
loves his horse. The Don, freed from all desire, may reason while Woltz
explodes (ejaculates). Men who “go off,” Sonny Corleone included, are
finally the dangerous men. Michael gets “colder” during all crises, start-
ing with “that strange delicious chill filling his body” (150) just before he
murders Solozzo.
      All these significations are easily obtainable from The Godfather as
Puzo repeats their import again and again. In melodrama, good and evil,
hot and cold, love and hate are drawn as maps on the faces of the lead
characters, so there can be no mistake of their place in the agon that
loudly proclaims their travails. Barthes’s “The World of Wrestling” in
Mythologies evinces a great nostalgia and fondness for this signifying
world. Professional wrestling is exactly what it appears to be with no
obfuscation of its process in the morality plays of broadly drawn heroes
and villains. Barthes unpacks wrestling thusly: “This emptying out of
                               Barthes and Puzo                             169



interiority to the benefit of its exterior signs, this exhaustion of content
by the form, is the very principal of triumphant classical art” (18). For
Barthes, wrestling “always accomplishes completely” (24); “there is no
symbol, no allusion, everything is presented exhaustively” (25). This
admirable aesthetic for Barthes is as close an approximation to a simu-
lated state of nature as he can find in popular representation. Wrestling
is a creation almost coextensive with its truth; it is what it is, the audi-
ence is not tricked or taken advantage of.
      What this might mean for fictional representation is expressed most
movingly by Bourdieu, surely one of Barthes’s godsons, who at the end
of a long essay on Flaubert’s Sentimental Education states that he admires
most Flaubert’s “refusal to give the reader the deceptive satisfactions of-
fered by the false philistine humanisms of the sellers of illusion” (Field of
Cultural Production 210–11) and that Flaubert is to be found, “like Spinoza’s
god,” “immanent and co-extensive with his creation,” that here is Flaubert’s
point of view (211). Here is an attempt to find the morality of an aesthetic
that binds realism and literary impressionism. Also, Bourdieu is looking
for the same principles of austerity and great laboring artistic humility to
apply to a canonical work such as Flaubert’s that Barthes is trying to find
for the “authentic” public spectacle. For both critics, their tristesse is before
the artifical complexity of all critical discourse that yearns for the equiva-
lence of truth in its dialogue with the rhetoric of the artifact that it exam-
ines, even as they hold the artifact itself before the bar of immanence and
coextensive social and moral truth. The desire of the critic for collapse
into some sort of equivalence with the work is to not lose the value of the
work in the critical dissection, re-creating the anxiety of a critic such as
Jameson for something demonstrably true. Thus Puzo’s watershed state-
ments of nervous management and interrogation—“as if the Don could
truly snatch back”; “there couldn’t be any kind of world” are, set against
this fierce critical ethic, false universals and bad-faith questions, “keys
with which to open nature” as Barthes wearily writes about wrestling,
searching for the “form of a Justice which is at last intelligible” (25).
Barthes can’t keep his wry exasperation out of this last line. To be “intel-
ligible” about the universe through Don Corleone’s sonorous manage-
ment of his world is Puzo’s message to his readers. Yet any large novel
is a more sprawling and open-ended messy canvas that produces slip-
page through the interrelations of dozens of people who walk out of the
novelist’s control into history, ethnicity, gender, and nation.
      Mythologies finally provides tools for an inventory of The Godfather’s
necessary set of dialogic relationships. Barthes’ method is clearly a place
to start in an examination of popular signification. The author’s domin-
ion over the signifier constitutes an imperial command of the signified.16
Bakhtin has stated any novel’s potential power best by saying that the
truly novelistic denies a single unitary language (like that of Don Corleone)
“as the sole verbal and semantic center of the ideological world” (Bakhtin
170                              Chapter 5



364). The hypothesis here has been that in popular fiction, the mythical
signifier is often where history is denied by an authorial sleight-of-hand
that refuses to decenter language into true dialogue. Puzo exposes our
universal yearnings and fears for the characters and ourselves through
forms (Woltz, the Don, Kay, Khartoum) that then must be politically
reinvested to retrieve the outrage beneath the obfuscations. Who should
say what Woltz says in The Godfather on behalf of an American consensus
moralism? Wouldn’t that be in another novel with a different agenda?
What should Apollonia say, if anything? Should The Godfather’s real vic-
tims speak, and who are they? The middle class? The poor? The readers?
To restore the muddle that popular texts prematurely move to clarify
about the individual and the family, law and justice, freedom and author-
ity, men and women may appear a negative step toward a reinstitution
of an elitist critical pessimism but is necessary to counter the affirmation
of the patriarchal and capitalist power represented in The Godfather and
wrest a set of conflicting values and commentary as to what constitutes
the “good life” in Puzo’s America.
       The criticism of popular fiction must continually gauge the contain-
ment strategies practiced within the authority of the signifier, whether
it’s a Yankee seaman telling the reader to “Call me Ishmael” or a devas-
tated young black woman addressing her letters to “Dear God.” As Gerard
Genette comments, all literature should maintain “as long as possible
that opening, that uncertainty of signs which allows one to breathe” (Genette
141). Barthes adds in the same spirit: “if there is a ‘health’ of language,
it is the arbitrariness of the sign which is its grounding” (Mythologies
128). This almost ebullient belief in language’s pure potential is an affir-
mative gesture that may buttress our sensibilities and give hope to our
ethical and sentimental imaginings that studying popular fiction might
yield the moral dialogue we seek within our differences. Hume wrote
that it is “natural for us to seek a standard of taste; a rule by which the
various sentiments of men may be reconciled; at least a decision afforded,
confirming one sentiment and condemning another” (“Of the Standard
of Taste” 309). Barthes always knew that such a critical agenda was both
necessary and exceedingly difficult, especially in less-than-innocent popu-
lar forms. Writing is always worked on and traversed, “the signifier of
the literary myth . . . a form which is already filled with meaning and
which receives from the concept of literature a new signification” (My-
thologies 134). To understand The Godfather’s seductive power is to police
the signifiers and keep acknowledging the dialectical flow between natu-
ralizing and historicizing, even when Puzo refuses to maintain such a
dialogue—especially because he refuses to do so.17
                 Part III
Positioning The Godfather in
  American Narrative Study
This page intentionally left blank.
                     chapter six


       The Godfather and Melodrama:
        Authorizing the Corleones as
             American Heroes
Let me say that we must always look to our own interests. We are men who
have refused to be puppets dancing on a string pulled by the men on high.
We have been fortunate here in this country.
                                                 —Don Corleone, The Godfather

Tom. Don’t let anyone kid you. It’s all personal, every bit of business. Every
piece of shit every man has to eat every day of his life is personal. They call
it business. OK. But it’s personal as hell. You know where I learned that
from? The Don. My old man. The Godfather.
                              —Michael Corleone to Tom Hagen, The Godfather

I believe that it can accurately be said that the entire history of the novel as
a popular form is critically tied to its sentimental texture and to its melodra-
matic scheme of action. The two are nearly inseparable.
                                                     —Philip Fisher, Hard Facts

To read sympathetically becomes synonomous with reading like an
American.
                                          —Elizabeth Barnes, States of Sympathy

       Chapters 3 through 5 were centered on ways to read The Godfather
critically according to tenets extant in contemporary theory. By reading key
scenes and characters through dialogics, the ethnic ensemble, and the poli-
tics of signification, I attempted to show how Puzo worked through issues
in his fiction, not always toward greater clarification and deepening mean-
ing but rather by performing the conflicts in his own nature as an Italian
American son, an aspiring elite author, and a writer in the marketplace. I

                                      173
174                                Chapter 6



stressed how Puzo’s treatment of writers, women, the family, male power,
and authority were managed and contained in his sensibility and portrayed
in his fiction.
       A case could be made that The Godfather’s climate of reception in
1969 was in part dictated by that historical moment (patriarchy under
severe stress because of the Vietnam War, collapsing American families,
and generational conflict, a craving for law and order beyond compro-
mised American institutions), but such hypotheses do not account for the
kind of alternative Don Corleone and his family provide. The largest
fiction that The Godfather allows its readers to inhabit is that of enormous
and unqualified American security and success: the fantasy of a self-
reliant, upward mobility within a total identity in family. The full power
of the Corleone family and its victories is affirmed through the most
compelling melodrama. John Cawelti has called melodrama “one of the
basic archetypes of moral fantasy” in which “poetic justice” is its essen-
tial shape, and the movement is from disorder and chaos toward a “be-
nevolent moral order” (262).1 Melodrama is not a genre in and of itself,
but it can cut across all the popular genres and, in fact, is the driving
engine of most of them.
       The Godfather is a text that always tries to have it all ways. The ultimate
end of this inclusive family fantasy is suggested by Michael’s speech to Kay
just before he orders the murders of the heads of the Five Families: “[He’d]
like to make [his] children as secure as possible before they join that general
destiny” of America (365). Vito Corleone’s death in Michael’s arms comes
right after he whispers to his son, “[L]ife is so beautiful” (409), and one must
conclude it certainly is if the force of his life and victories has implemented
the Corleone empire. The historical legacy of Sicilian oppression that the
immigrant carries to the New World is that society is oppressive and hier-
archical. The mythic formulation of the American melodrama is that man
must strive for individual self-expression. These two major strands—the
historical and the mythic—feed into one another as dispensation for their
dual identity: the Corleones may go outside of society because of both their
prior history and America’s a-historical call for individual freedom. The
“freedom from” servitude in Sicily is matched by the “freedom to” pursue
an American individualism through extraordinary claims of character,
exceptionalism, and the sheer force of the personal.
       The Godfather decrees that, in America, one can achieve anything
through force without denying origins or becoming legally or morally
culpable. An immigrant can retain ethnic identity and yet succeed in
America beyond belief in an open society without becoming “open” him-
or herself. Indeed, Ferraro comments that within this Mafia clan occurs
a merging of social and business functions into kin-centered enterprise
and that the cost of employing blood in the marketplace is finding the
company at home (183, 193). The corollary is that The Godfather makes
murder “famil-iar” as well. Such is the powerful new contract that The
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                      175



Godfather writes with America, denying any obligation to its national
narrative as well as to its civic contracts.
      If The Godfather is this melodramatic social text that is always evolv-
ing the family’s power and authority, what sort of cultural and historical
tracks is the novel laying down? What work is it performing in the
American consciousness? Puzo writes the melodrama as man overcom-
ing historical circumstance and class disadvantage. Destiny becomes
optimistic evolution. How does Puzo achieve the sonorous flow of this
master narrative? Philip Fisher in Hard Facts depicts the power of Ameri-
can historical and sentimental novels and their cultural acts of forging a
prehistory for national self-definition. Fisher’s prime nineteenth-century
examples are Cooper’s Leatherstocking Novels and Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s
Cabin, which succeeded brilliantly in ordering massive American psychic
and historical materials that were then consigned to the commonplace
and forgotten as literary achievements. I suggest that in The Godfather,
Puzo wrote both a historical and a sentimental novel. The grounds of
Corleone power, the bloody massacres and their forgetting, are akin to
Cooper’s chronicles of Indian warfare and Anglo settlement prior to the
staking of the land. Puzo adopts the popular historical novel form with
his chronicle of the establishment of the family business. Furthermore, he
places the drama of this establishment within the family itself, the locus
of sentimental fiction, in which, through the complicity of a readerly
amnesia, full normality is extended to the Corleone fathers and sons as
they receive our sympathy in their battles against their enemies. As pur-
veyors of a fated violence, Corleone men act swiftly and decisively, while
the Corleone women consistently are denied any dignity in a domestic
space that is always the site of male domination and sexual hypocrisy.
The helplessness of Vito Corleone [Andolini], first as the Sicilian peasant
boy and then as the immigrant father, is transformed by the benign dis-
pensation to “go bad” in search of American power and authority. An
empire is inaugurated by killing a man. A sentimental domestic fiction,
putatively the locus of real female authority and multiplicity, is sub-
sumed in a male takeover.
      Melodrama is the preferred mode of the newly arrived, the already
excluded, the ambitious, the outsider, and the socially conscious. How-
ever, “melodrama” has taken on another strong meaning in current lit-
erary-critical discussion. Nina Baym’s landmark essay, “Melodramas of
Beset Manhood: How Theories of American Fiction Exclude Women
Authors,” (1982) has defined for this generation of critics the sense that
the very act of male self-creation is a dramatic ur-narrative running
through the conceptualizations of post–World War II American critics
who unconsciously extrapolate from the American hero’s crisis apart from
society and make it into the author’s crisis: “[T]he mythic encounter of
hero and possibility is a projection of the artist’s situation” (76). This
melodrama has already been projected in chapter 4 as the most congenial
176                              Chapter 6



form for Puzo’s situation and trajectory as an author. Puzo can, through
the creation of Michael Corleone, reconcile himself to Italian American
culture by becoming the good son to the father he never had. By Michael
“going bad” in renouncing American heroism and education, he regains
his Sicilian status. By “going bad” in literature, Puzo renounces the quest
for elite literary status and writes The Godfather. Such is Puzo’s American
author melodrama, one in which the indignation of the Corleone charac-
ters channels the indignation of the veteran novelist with little to show for
his twenty years of toil. Melodrama often operates through a great resent-
ment, usually on the part of characters who feel hugely wronged, whether
unlucky in love or in some injustice done to them by another person, a
culture, a universe. Puzo’s skill is in applying melodrama to the business
subject, making the male role into one that is deeply personal, even as the
plotting against perceived enemies is coldly, patiently carried out.


The Godfather and American Fiction in 1900: Force
    Philosophy, Capitalist Heroes, and Escape

       The Godfather articulates American psychological certainties and capi-
talist victories long since won and criticized by modern critics during the
twentieth century. The Godfather can be placed in dialogue with a now-
extinct line of American naturalistic-realistic novels that took Darwinian-
Spencerian force philosophy as a guiding principle, its heroes struggling
in a hostile world that is always moving according to principles of indi-
vidualism, intense debate about the value of humanitarianism, and dis-
like of any control, be it that of the government, the “system,” or any
form of social regulation or obligation. The flowering of American liter-
ary naturalism at the turn of the twentieth century featured male novel-
ists such as Norris and London, creating forceful heroes who tried to
drive through all social contradictions to stand alone in authority and
achievement. Ronald Martin states that “the universe of force became
part of the intellectual superstructure of American capitalism” (94). That
capitalism was best transposed and expressed through the melodrama of
individual strivers who countenanced no checks against their ambition
or vision, who practiced an unbridled power until or unless authors
defeated them, through fated weaknesses, over-reaching or simple deter-
minism, what Puzo grandly calls in The Godfather, “the nature of the
universe” (392).
       Late-nineteenth-century inheritors of Herbert Spencer’s evolution-
ary optimism such as John Fiske had assured Americans that “the nature
of their society—the industrialization, the competition, the unremitting
change and growth”—was not only inevitable but “it was right, that
these were God’s ways” (Martin 60). Spencer’s deploying a series of vast
metaphors from physical science over the entire array of social sciences
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                     177



in his synthetic philosophy preached a cheerful determinism that coin-
cided perfectly with the American temper to justify any conceivable
competition, monopoly, or social inequality. Fiske asserted that American
captains of industry were truly heroic high points of human evolution
(Martin 74–75). Spencer conceived of “a lawful cosmos evolving inexora-
bly toward Something Better” (Lears 21). Such yearning fit seamlessly
into the romance of American capitalism. Individualism of every variety
could thus find underwriting through Spencerian doctrine; William James
called Spencer “the philosopher whom those who have no other philoso-
pher can appreciate” (Martin 86), and certainly the middle-class eagerly
embraced a vision of personal success that stipulated anyone could pro-
claim him- or herself exceptional and thus validate any action. Michael
Corleone is a Spencerian (on the way to becoming an Ayn Rand hero)
when he says, “My father is a businessman trying to provide for his wife
and children. . . . He doesn’t accept the rules of the society we live in
because those rules would have condemned him to a life not suitable to
a man like himself, a man of extraordinary force and character” (365).
Nothing that society offers will be as meaningful or valid as what the
individual establishes as existing within himself. A powerful self-
installation leads to an exceptionalism that is All American on the one
hand and most familiar in popular melodrama on the other.
      In one sense, The Godfather can be posited as a throwback text, an
archaism that endorses a cosmic force philosophy more akin to that found
in novels of the early 1900s such as Norris’s The Octopus (1901), London’s
The Call of the Wild (1903), The Sea Wolf (1904), and Martin Eden (1908),
and Dreiser’s Sister Carrie (1900) and the Cowperwood novels, The Fin-
ancier (1912) and The Titan (1914). Norris’s Magnus Derrick and Buck
Annixter struggle for heroic self-definition against Norris’s vast symbols
of wheat and railroad in the most extreme genre clashes of sentimental-
ism, naturalism, and melodrama. London’s Buck, Wolf Larsen, and Mar-
tin Eden rage in extreme paradigms of heroic individualism but end in
isolation or in madness, depression, and death. Dreiser knows both the
quiet, relentless fall of a Hurstwood in Sister Carrie and the calm, steady
rapacity of Frank Cowperwood. Such extreme tests of the universal order
or disorder are often best expressed in fiction through a broad melo-
drama. The Godfather can be posited as a later inheritor of this American
literary tradition of predestined force and melodramatic presentation as
exemplified within the specific forms of the immigrant saga and popular
novel. Puzo sought to catch that force in his odyssey through famelessness
as a writer in the 1950s and 1960s. Such force was often the compelling
riddle that Dreiser and London had plumbed in their fiction and com-
mentary. Doctorow in Ragtime posits a Dreiser, “suffering terribly from
the bad reviews and negligible sales of his his first book, Sister Carrie,”
turning and turning his chair in a furnished room in Brooklyn, “seeking
the proper alignment” (23). Doctorow’s characters in Ragtime all look to
178                              Chapter 6



find ways to tap into the main line of modern American energy, to situate
themselves within its momentum (see chapter 7). Puzo’s midcentury
quandaries and American dreaming about fiction and success have an-
tecedents in the struggles of his fictional ancestors Dreiser and London,
two authors who constantly sought an “alignment” within generic con-
ventions, philosphical issues, and their own thinking through of careers
and force.
       Dreiser and Puzo show uncanny similarity in the rhetoric they used
to look back on their early writing days and desires from the vantage
point of great success. Both idealistic and pessimistic, they evince a stud-
ied confusion within the certainty that America promises much to the
writer who can find its force fields.2 Dreiser cast himself in the 1890s as
a young writer who believed, in his first flush of post-Darwinian scien-
tific knowledge, that “Man was a mechanism, undevised and uncreated,
and a badly and carelessly driven one at that” (Matthiessen 41). In his
own bleak family life in Terre Haute, Indiana, Dreiser had watched his
sisters drift away to larger cities and fall into urban iniquities. He could
rail against magazine fiction of the 1890s, saying, “Love was almost in-
variably rewarded . . . dreams came true . . . with such an air of assur-
ance, omniscience and condescension, that I was quite put out by my
own lacks and defeats. . . . I had no such tales to tell, and, however much
I tried, I could not think of any” (A Book about Myself 490–91). Such views
predate the Puzo who flatly stated after The Godfather made him famous
that in his youth he “never heard an Italian singing,” he knew no “lov-
able Italians,” and he wondered “where the hell the moviemakers and
storywriters got all their ideas from” (“Choosing a Dream” 13).
       Such compensatory demystification from Dreiser and Puzo sug-
gests they were compelled to it by a sense that sentiment and melodrama
as stays against inexorable force were finally what they must bear wit-
ness against. Yet along with their debunking of their own beginnings and
felt subjects comes an extraordinary belief in American Dreaming ex-
pressed through sentiment and melodrama. Dreiser writes that “having
two hundred and forty dollars saved, I decided to leave this dismal scene
and seek the charm of the great city beyond, hoping that there I might
succeed at something, be eased and rested by some important work of
some kind” (Matthiessen 42). The force of the magnetic pull mixes the
language of Horatio Alger (to the city with “two hundred and forty
dollars”), literary naturalism (“dismal scene”), and romance (“the charm
of the great city beyond”) and continues with vague self-made hopes
(“succeed at something”) laced by what can only be called “evangelical”
verbs (“eased and rested”), and concludes by the haziest of capitalist
desire (“some important work of some kind”). That “important work”
might require unstinting effort and driving ambition or that “unimpor-
tant work” of a kind exemplified by sweat shop, assembly line, or day
labor would give the lie to “rested” and “eased” is not an option. Dreiser
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                      179



effaces the pain and suffering of such work in the melodrama of “Com-
ing to the City” in Sister Carrie. Such an extraordinary mixed rhetoric of
accents, impulses, and yearnings calls up Dreiserian multiple energies
through vague and shifting language that nonetheless powerfully de-
fines “American Dreaming.”
        Puzo is a less articulate inheritor in his own musing a half-century
later when he writes that as a child, “I myself had a hundred dreams
from which to choose. For I was already sure that I would make my
escape, that I was one of the chosen. I would be rich, famous, happy. I
would master my destiny” (“Choosing a Dream”) for “I believed in
art. . . . It gave me a comfort I found in no other place” (“The Making of
The Godfather”). For Puzo, leaving the family to go to war in 1941 is the
equivalent of Dreiser’s leaving Terre Haute for Chicago and St. Louis.
Puzo evinces Dreiser’s earnestness, his refusal to judge or moralize, his
view of anarchy in family relations, as if a hole had been blown in his
affective life. Puzo and Dreiser also share a coarseness and a sentimental
commodity hunger about success. Both writers have a lumbering style
and little humor. Puzo’s “great city beyond” is Las Vegas, rather than
Dreiser’s Chicago or St. Louis, where all American wraps are off. After
the failures of heroine-driven Sister Carrie and Jennie Gerhardt, Dreiser
licked his wounds, as did Puzo, by magazine and pulp writing in the
city, until finally becoming a success with his novels of the tycoon Frank
Cowperwood. Likewise, Puzo had to turn to his male “tycoon” hero Vito
Corleone after The Dark Arena and The Fortunate Pilgrim did little to es-
tablish him. In the trajectory of their careers and their constructed narra-
tive of their early years, both Puzo and Dreiser catch a terrible and
inexorable under-rhythm of American desire and force to effect their
escapes into and through fiction and thus achieve success.
        In The Financier, Dreiser’s Frank Cowperwood is the key expression
of force philosophy in action within the business realm. He has
instrumentalized destiny and sharpened his mind and will into cold dead
tools to reach his ends. A financial speculator, he has no product or yield
in the commodity world beyond money itself. The Civil War, a momen-
tary annoyance in his drive to wealth, he deems not profitable. He gazes
on social structures such as family and calibrates what they mean to his
need. Worrying about what happens to “superior people,” he thinks,
“force was the answer—great mental and physical force” because the
“little guardians of law and morality” spoke only in great platitudes and
hypocrisy. Recognizing this is the organization of the world, Cowperwood
decides “the thing for him to do was to get rich and hold his own, to
build up a seeming of virtue and dignity which would pass muster for
the genuine thing. Force would do that” (121). Such lines preview Michael
Corleone’s appraisal of what the Corleone family needs to simulate be-
fore it can join that American “general destiny,” though Dreiser’s
Cowperwood is always more candid about his goals. He parses out that
180                              Chapter 6



good and evil are “toys of clerics by which they made money” (205);
therefore, he need not fear any opposing force since no transcendant
reality reveals itself to him. Cowperwood then falls back on pessimistic
evolutionary theory to suppose that “life was a dark, insoluble mystery,
but whatever it was, strength and weakness were its two constituents”
(241). In 1920 after Cowperwood had established Dreiser as a successful
novelist, his general description of “the American Financier” includes
phrases such as “his aggressive organizing mind . . . finds itself blazing
to get some new thing done . . . [and] is inspired with some great enthu-
siasm for something.” Dreiser is describing the business man as artist
(Smith 74). In 1922 he assumes the same rhetoric to describe his own
literary dreaming in the 1890s as the business props can then fall away.
For Dreiser, tycoons, financiers, shopgirls, novelists, and midwestern boys
on their way up all possessed a seamless narrative, one and indivisible.
This indiscriminate tonal deafness imbues Puzo’s essays and fiction
as well.
      While Dreiser sought “important work,” and Puzo was certain he
would be one of the “chosen,” no one chose Jack London, nor was he the
vague dreamer of Dreiser’s fiction. After a tempestuous childhood and
young manhood, London began in his early twenties to write like some
late Victorian engine, working sixteen to eighteen-hour days. Papering
his walls with rejection slips, he would not be denied. He signed his first
book contract at age twenty-three in 1899 and became the first milionaire
novelist in American history (Lynn 77). London sought extreme locales
for much of his fiction, the harsh sites of a natural world (the Yukon, the
high seas) or the lower urban depths or majestic California. In contrast,
Dreiser and Puzo are indoor novelists for the most part and do not seek
the extremity of natural setting. The one London novel most analogous
to trajectories in Puzo’s career was Martin Eden (1909). The protagonist
by dint of will forces his way to a successful writing career in which he
leaps over barriers of class and education only to find his triumph hol-
low, bereft of any true capital he can carry forward into an integrated life
of creation and achievement. Martin Eden is an unadulterated Bourdieuian
text of a young adventurous tough who becomes a writer and vainly
attempts to bridge all the gaps in his background of taste, environment,
and pleasures. Martin painstakingly corrects his own diction in front of
Ruth Morse, the upper-middle-class girl he worships. He is Pygmalion-
on-the-way-to-Gatsby, working in self-fashioning, telling Ruth, “I want
to breathe air like you get in this house—air that is filled with books and
pictures, and beautiful things, where people talk in low voices an’ are
clean.” He pragmatically concludes, “Now, how am I goin’ to get it?
Where do I take hold an’ begin? (97).
      Martin wants to regulate his own individualism and possess his
own capital. His intellectual property is himself but finally he turns on
himself, and his labor. In his early exuberance at his growing powers, he
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                       181



finds Spencer’s First Principles and believes that “here was the man Spen-
cer, organizing all knowledge for him, reducing everything to unity, elabo-
rating ultimate realities” (149). Martin takes his Spencer as an intellectual
act of faith, while more mundane realities trip him up. He charts his
writing plans, believing he can alternate between hack work and master-
pieces (like Merlyn in Fools Die), grinding out enough of the former to
buy time to write the latter. London faithfully shows Martin laboring
over long and short pieces of fiction and philosphical essays. No other
American novel has ever had hundreds of pages of plot devoted to the
mechanics and economics of Grub Street and the quarterlies, or to the
calculated labor of the writing desk. Martin becomes facile enough to
frame a dozen marketable short stories in half an hour and “fill [them]
in at his convenience” (301). He knows the newspaper “storiette” for-
mula, which stipulates a piece should “never end unhappily . . . never
contain beauty of language, subtlety of thought . . . real delicacy of sen-
timent” but must contain plenty of pure and noble sentiment (300). When
Ruth tries to tell him the truth about his failure as she sees it, he protests
he has greater talent than published writers; her answer is the awful
utilitarian truth of the middle class, the bottom line nightmare that Martin
has repressed in his writerly heroism: “But they sell theirs and you
don’t. . . . I don’t think you were made to write” (326). After he slowly
begins to place his manuscripts, the acceptance rate becomes a torrent.
He suddenly is welcome everywhere, even by Ruth’s father and wealthy
business acquaintances. Yet the long struggle to make it on his own ide-
alistic terms has empited him of writerly ambition or more stories to tell.
All his success comes for “work performed,” the anvillike phrase that
keeps hammering in his head. He rejects his success as completely as he
had defied what looked like his destined failure. Ruth is seen finally as
a chimera of safe opinions, someone from a deader and safe bourgeois
world that he does not even wish to join. When he sells his last manu-
script, he sees himself as “the fad of the hour.” The engine that was
Martin Eden shuts down, and he takes his own life.
       In Martin Eden, London depicted the intellectual and emotional
journey that Puzo would actually take through his decades-long attempts
to become an honored novelist, the success that The Godfather brought,
and the sourness that became him after its amazing public reception.
Taken together, Dreiser’s hope for “important work of some kind” and
London’s aggressive and constant assault on the literary marketplace
chart two exemplary careers of American writers who unswervingly
worshipped both force and the idea of literary success and knew in their
bones the endless rejection before that success and the facts of fame
thereafter. Frank Cowperwood and Martin Eden are their heroes—
Cowperwood the artistic capitalist, Martin Eden the capitalist artist. In
Vito Corleone, Puzo would create his Cowperwood with one very differ-
ent attribute. Instead of family as merely another appurtenance, Puzo
182                              Chapter 6



makes family survival the center of all Vito Corleone’s predations. Puzo
also lived the life of Martin Eden pre-Godfather, with many of the same
pure protestations about the efficacy and glories of art and then the great
disillusion at its failure to transform him. Dreiser and London preceded
Puzo by a half-century, but all three writers’ extreme attraction to and
repulsion from art and success were in themselves melodramatic in na-
ture, projected through the fiction of the essential writer’s anxiety about
the author as both energy source and pure American product.
      Such capitalist heroes were largely forgotten after World War I, when
modern American fiction began to cast the businessman as Babbit rather
than as a Spencerian giant. Mencken’s appelation of the “booboisie”
discouraged any serious fictional treatment of the heroic capitalist, and
the Depression made such a figure an anachronism or part of the prob-
lem of a wounded American society. Fitzgerald had Gatsby, Dick Diver,
and Monroe Stahr, Promethean heroes deeply involved in the new econo-
mies of bootlegging, psychiatry, and cinema, while Faulkner had Thomas
Sutpen, a relentless backwoods tycoon. However, these capitalist heroes
in modernist classics were never presented without being embedded in
issues of romance and race, patriarchal power and longing. By the end
of the 1950s, elite American fiction posited young heroes with no sense
of vocation or aptitude in a capitalist society, characters abstaining from
the customary ways of making due along the whole spectrum of relative
privilege to deprivation: Percy’s stockbroker and closet existentialist Binx
Bolling in The Moviegoer; testy librarian Neil Klugman storming the
Patimkin gates for his Jewish American golden girl in Roth’s Goodbye,
Columbus; Updike’s ex-basketball star Rabbit Angstrom demonstrating a
potato peeler in the window of a dingy department store in a Pennsyl-
vania factory town in Rabbit, Run. The personal crisis of the young male
character was defined against the absurdity of the work role he was
expected to inhabit and the success he was to emulate. No Vito Corleone
to emulate and no Michael Corleone to become him.
      By 1969, in the year of The Godfather’s publication, the American
novel could not include a true capitalist hero without intense melodra-
matic presentation in popular fiction or through ironic deflation in elite
fiction. Even middle-brow fiction had begun to abandon the figure after
World War II, except for the more popular work of John O’Hara and
James Gould Cozzens and the truly fanciful metamorphoses of John
Cheever. The avatars of businessmen heroes ran the gamut from Ayn
Rand’s philosophically based capitalist supermen such as Howard Roark
in The Fountainhead (1943) and John Galt in Atlas Shrugged (1957) to Harold
Robbins’ sensationalized and loose fictionalization of young Howard
Hughes in The Carpetbaggers (1961). Rand’s visionaries found themselves
in the wrong timid and spineless society, while Robbins’s hero sought to
eradicate the nightmare power of his father by becoming him. Without
such intellectual or pathological justification, American businessmen in
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                      183



fiction were most often depicted as middle-class bores, frustrated fathers,
and husbands full of ennui as depicted in Sloan Wilson’s The Man in the
Grey Flannel Suit (1955), a key realist text of post-war disaffection with
corporate life.3 Such a novel affirms what The Godfather will underscore a
decade later in sensational fashion: that family and home are primarily
important. Wilson’s hero Tom Rath is suffering in the culture of David
Reisman’s “lonely crowd” and is a node in an economy controlled by
large corporations.
       The Godfather shifts the focus of corporate power back to a text of
private clans which operate in the smallest possible effective unit for
protection. Puzo converts all strategic family business decisions into
strongly emotional justifications and transforms all structural details of
business decisions back into the naked, personal, and instinctual. The
novel never shows a Corleone in a true business meeting as the term
might be known, nor does a Corleone ever have money change hands or
handle money. All talk about market capitalization, raw materials, labor,
the infrastructure of collection at the street level, the mechanics of buying
off and into the courts and political system–such is all left to the reader’s
imagination. We are as far in The Godfather from real insight into Corleone
business and its complex workings as we are from understanding Gatsby’s
world as bootlegger or in knowing how Heathcliff made his money in
Liverpool and returned to Wuthering Heights in the clothes of a gentle-
man. The material underwriting of the business plot is always a given,
a suppressed and phantom history, so that we can keep on point in a
family melodrama about life and death justifications and action of men
who are, in the ruse of the text, “natural” forces.
       Kinship functions as bureaucracy; Corleones never fear unemploy-
ment, never feel anxiety, rootlessness, or insecurity (the collective anomie
of modernity), and they always knows the chain of command and the
task at hand. In a society increasingly centering on processing informa-
tion or making endless images or replication of available goods or ser-
vices, the Corleone economy creates no jobs and sends nothing into
circulation but rather feeds off the larger economy’s sin and error, its
predilection for gambling, its desire for sexual pleasure, and its need for
ready cash. Human, all too human, and hearkening back to a residual
American Protestant ethic of self-reliance and individual striving that the
Corleones tweak in the reader’s consciousness. Finally, the Corleones
satisfy the immense nostalgia for values, stability, and tradition, placing
such yearning in an uncomplicated capitalist and benign Freudian imagi-
nary, even if the world thus posited belongs more to the era of Theodore
Roosevelt or in such jocularly nostalgic patriarchal popular successes as
the play Life with Father (1935) or Cheaper by the Dozen (1948), where
efficiently expert Frank Gilbreth lovingly bulldozes his wife and twelve
children with modern methods. Such authority in the home begins in the
office. The Corleone father and son are the darker immigrant twins of
184                              Chapter 6



such American patriarchal icons and staple fare, off the boat, into the
ghetto, standing behind their predations with unconquerable family.
Within the triple hybridity of immigrant saga, sensational crime narra-
tive, and business novel, an increasingly uncontrollable American social
existence is dramatized on the deeply satisfying level of family. The eth-
nic status of the Corleones enriches their drama and exoticises their
struggle as “others” who are nonetheless just American folks, ruled by a
powerful and loving father, who’s just taking care of business.


              Melodrama as Fictional Business

       American best sellers in the twentieth century ignored much of the
century’s philosophical, aesthetic, and epistemological debate and treated
both the observably social world and its varied explanations as entities
to be comprehended by broad strokes of a realist melodrama. The God-
father is particularly well adapted to a consideration of melodramatic
effect. The novel and films produce a wide range of feelings in readers
and audiences, from pity to fear, from sentimental identification to moral
indignation. The Corleones’ externalized sense of justice and order moves
swiftly to right any wrong done to the family and those it protects. The
novel’s various climactic points are always enacted through sex (Woltz’s
girl, Johnny’s girls, Lucy’s angst) or violence (the shootings of the Don,
the deaths of Fanucci, Sonny, Khartoum, Luca Brasi, Sollozzo and
McCluskey, Appolonia); in the novel’s quieter moments, business is trans-
acted through the interplay of broad gesture and euphemism (the
wedding day supplicants, Sigonora Colombo’s landlord, the Dons’ “con-
vention”). Barzini makes the point that Italians don’t countenance life
reduced to unadorned truth and that acting out a character’s role is an
essential part of that character’s life (90). This broadly conceived and
heightened sense of presentation, mediated crucially by bella figura’s or-
dering of gesture, is everywhere inimical to classic definitions of the
quotidian nature of realism. Yet Barzini also points to the fact that such
an active dramatic mode is one developed “by a pessimistic, realistic,
resigned, and frightened people” (75). Melodrama then may be what
staves off the inevitabilities of fate that a naturalistic strain of realism
represents, reenacting deep Italian historical structures in an excitement
of surfaces and bodies engaged in significance.
       Peter Brooks in a most intelligent study of melodrama writes, “One
might be tempted to consider melodrama as a constant of the imagination
and a constant among literary modes; it could be one typological pole,
detectable at all epochs” (14). Thus melodrama is not a genre or subgenre.
Clear-eyed and somewhat dubious, Brooks calls it “a reductive literalistic
version [of any] mode” and “a temptation” because it offers a complete set
of attitudes, gestures, and phrases “coherently conceived toward dramati-
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                        185



zation of essential spiritual conflict” (20). Social melodramatists, among
whom Brooks considers Balzac, James, Dickens, Gogol, Dostoevsky, and
Proust, engage man’s social existence and its “moral drama” in which
characters represent and undergo extremes (22, 36). Brooks sees melo-
drama as remarkably egalitarian in which “the democracy of ethical rela-
tionships passes through the sentimentalization of morality, the identification
of ethics with basic familial psychic patternings” (44). Certainly any God-
father reader or viewer has felt the intense affiliation for the band of mur-
derers we come to know as the only “moral” group in the novel. The text’s
signification assures that Don Corleone’s ethics are superior, no matter
what the situation. The reader is encouraged to forget misgivings about
Corleone actions because sympathies are so strongly elicited for and on
behalf of children, a place in America, a better life. Melodrama’s open
seduction of the reader/viewer with its action and resolution occurs over
and over again within narratives where otherwise stark or humdrum re-
alities would make life not worth living or not interesting enough to think
on. Melodrama qualifies naturalism and animates realism by cutting deter-
minism and vivifing the quotidian. It may be employed sparingly by an
author to great effect (Dimmesdale dying on the scaffold in The Scarlet
Letter) or become a long cry against injustice and the implied call for its
refutation (the Victorian preference brought into popular classic form by
Dickens in a novel such as Bleak House).
       Melodrama does not lack for definitions and applications. Richard
Chase calls it “tragedy in a vacuum” and the suitable form for “writers
who do not have a firm sense of living in a culture” (41), while Brooks
labels it a “democratic art” (43). Brooks also cites Eric Bentley who in-
vokes Freud when he calls melodrama the “naturalism of the dream life”
and, in Victorian times, “the poor man’s catharsis” (198). Ronald Martin
calls Frank Norris a “melodramatist of realism” (150). Finally, Fisher
believes that “the entire history of the novel as a popular form is criti-
cally tied to its sentimental texture and to its melodramatic scheme of
action” (92). What makes the form so specifically American for applica-
tion to Puzo is precisely his insecurity about a foothold in American
culture, specifically literary culture, but also his status as a second-
generation immigrant and his determination to have the Corleones par-
take of America’s promise while preserving a fantastic distance from any
of its institutions. Puzo also sees the Corleones as deeply wronged and
demanding justice after living in a prior tragic servitude in Sicily, one that,
when transferred to the promised land of the American twentieth century,
does indeed occur in a vacuum, where Puzo can construct spectacular
victories against all foes, a melodramatic pattern endlessly satisfying to
readers and viewers.
       Chase provides a catalogue of melodrama’s variants to which can
be attached Godfather examples: “strict conventionalism” (“the Don was
notoriously straitlaced in matters of sex”); “cruel victimization” (why
186                              Chapter 6



should the Don’s family suffer?); “violent indeterminacy of events” (mur-
ders bringing almost every plot line to conclusion). Chase believes melo-
drama “demands abstract and conventionalized characters” (characters
of “Destiny”); “clash of ideas and forces” (the Don as a natural force)
(37–41). Chase is combing melodrama to help articulate what would come
to be known as the American Romance Paradigm, the critical attempt of
the American 1950s and 1960s to establish a literary canon for the Ameri-
can 1850s. The intensely symbolic American authors Chase and others
were establishing as America’s great writers (Poe, Melville, Hawthorne,
Thoreau) partook of melodrama for their greatest extreme effects but
“transcended” (the verb form of the privileged noun defining a writerly
generation) melodrama to enhance comedy and tragedy. For Chase (and
for his mentor Lionel Trilling), melodrama itself could produce only a
“vast body of inferior fiction,” which basically invoked “sensation and
sentiment”; such melodramatic novelists “do not have a firm sense of a
social arena” (41). This last opinion could surely be contested because the
most melodramatic and powerful text of Chase’s 1850s is Uncle Tom’s
Cabin, a key American document in the social arena as well as a defining
best seller. Finally, for Chase, culture and society are quite different and
sundered. Ideology and psychology make a culture, whereas society must
be engaged by the novelist in a muddy business of representative men,
actual conflict, and class structures. Chase wants melodrama to help man
prevail, but he has to be the right sort of man, a Promethean figure, an
ironist who is somehow universally significant rather than culturally
specific. Melodrama must be enlisted as a form which would culminate
in the mature art of a Henry James and texture a heroine such as Isabel
Archer. In short, Chase would recognize Puzo’s machinery but not his
novels. “Universally significant” to Mrs. Stowe would signify “Chris-
tian” and “millennial.” For Puzo, it might be “the nature of good and
evil,” a phrase that could be espoused as easily by Chase or his mentor
Lionel Trilling. Puzo doesn’t reinvest melodrama in “the best that has
been thought and said” because he simply doesn’t work at that level. The
problem with most of melodrama’s critics and benefactors is that they all
know it when they see it, but whether they endorse it depends upon the
complexity of the vehicle in which it appears. Brooks and Chase both
find James a melodramatist to great effect; neither would give Puzo a
second look.
      Popular fiction more easily affirms or juggles what elite fiction af-
firms after a hard-won moral struggle. What popular melodrama finally
concludes in a form of piety, with religious and bourgeois overtones, elite
literature finds at the abyss in barbarous knowledge. There are, as Barthes
reminds us, only so many universal signifieds (goodness, kindness,
wholeness, humaneness, and so on [Mythologies 121]), and they are shared
by popular and elite narratives. Thus melodrama is and could be an
essential part of any novelist’s repertoire. Puzo is especially called to the
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                       187



potential of the form. To write of an immigrant’s passage in American
culture, the novelist is immediately confronted with cultural uncertainty,
a heritage suddenly under erasure, emotional leave-taking and arrival,
potential sudden reversals in fortunes and wondrous new experience, no
everyday reality to depict in known patterns, often great suffering and
want, stories of escape and reconciliation, and mourning for those left
behind. The immigrant as hero, the immigrant family as unit, float in a
tentative relation to the new country, both not there and not yet. No-
where is this dynamic more keenly felt than in the economic sphere since
so much depended upon the man getting work to feed, clothe, and shel-
ter his family, whether on Puzo’s Lower West Side of New York or on the
American Great Plains.
      The deeply personal always threatens to come to the surface in The
Godfather. Michael begins The Godfather as an ironic commentator on the
Corleone wedding day festivities; he is doubly marked an “American”
by his war heroism in the marines and his Ivy League college-boy status.
However, outside the French Hospital, he is branded by McCluskey’s fist
as just another “punk,” a Five Family War casualty; following the assault,
he swiftly joins the melodrama as a full family business partner. When
the family war council is planning the execution of Sollozzo and
McCluskey, the ever-cautious Tom Hagen warns Michael that he shouldn’t
let his broken jaw influence his judgment, since “it was business, not
personal” (146). What Tom signifies is that McCluskey is a hireling, fol-
lowing orders from the other side. Hagen then sees Michael metamor-
phose: “he saw Michael’s face freeze into a mask that resembled uncannily
the Don’s.”

     Tom, don’t let anybody kid you. It’s all personal, every bit of
     business. Every piece of shit every man has to eat every day
     of his life is personal. They call it business. OK. But it’s per-
     sonal as hell. You know where I learned that from? The Don.
     My old man. The Godfather. If a bolt of lightning hit a friend
     of his the old man would take it personal. He took my going
     into the Marines personal. That’s what makes him great. The
     Great Don. He takes everything personal. Like God. He knows
     every feather that falls from the tail of a sparrow or however
     the hell it goes. Right? And you know something? Accidents
     don’t happen to people who take accidents as a personal in-
     sult. So I came late. OK, but I’m coming all the way. (146)

      A terrific Puzo speech. In such an outburst, his vivid rendering of
the strands of family and business is unparalleled in its jumble of per-
sonal resentments and practical applications. With Michael’s emotional
outcry that business is personal every day, the male melodrama of a
victimized outrage is in place. Man’s life itself when checked or bound
188                             Chapter 6



is always personal. The ugly “every piece of shit” maxim totalizes the
theatrical and universal nature of Michael’s metaphoric rendering of the
male plight. An inescapable slavery dogs man’s destiny. An unseen force
dictates man’s lot, cast as an endless and repetitive coercion that is de-
terministic, involuntary, and unacceptable. An unacknowledged “they”
might say it’s “business,” but Michael knows otherwise. The father
changes into the God who is watching over his creation to the miunutest
detail. In the middle of the speech, the dialogized accent becomes bibli-
cal, even in impatient secular citation (“however the hell it goes”) to
deflect anything in Michael’s vendetta from the personal or the material.
Then comes a perfectly pitched euphemism in bella figura about “acci-
dents” that once again deflects the cause and effect of a “business” de-
cision or competition. Michael is “coming,” the arch-angel of family and
business deliverance. Within the son’s powerful justification for aveng-
ing his own honor and aiding the stricken father is an old, old story. The
specific American scaffolding is kicked away, and Michael may be
launched on his familial destiny, which is to confront the evildoers who
would strike his family down. Michael cuts through all contradictions
when he stops justifying himself to Kay: “All I can say, I have to help my
father” (366). Such blood allegiances in melodrama override any other
possible connotations and considerations.
      Real-world business considerations in The Godfather also come
through a more no-nonsense business tycoon, the already much-maligned
Jack Woltz. Not burdened with biblical and ethnic responsibilties for
family and destinies, Woltz delivers a harsh market critique of the
Corleones’ power; it gets swallowed up in the melodrama but has
dialogized markers that belong to a real-time American world of mo-
nopoly capitalism. Puzo’s discrediting of Woltz was thoroughly estab-
lished before he protested that “there couldn’t be any kind of world if
[people were allowed to behead prize race horses].” But what it “meant”
to Woltz is of import: “It meant you couldn’t do what you wanted with
your own money, with the companies you owned, the power you had to
give orders. It was ten times worse than communism. It had to be smashed.
It must never be allowed” (69). Far from melodramatic universals, Woltz’s
rhetoric sees the “obscure importer of Italian olive oil” as a national
threat, one to capitalism itself, to corporate power, and, ideologically,
perhaps the heralding of an internal Cold War enemy more implacable
than the Soviets, lawlessness within the structure of individual freedoms.
      Woltz may be right: the Corleones as an inner rot may be much
more injurious to the American way, but Puzo won’t follow this line of
reasoning for long. The structure of business in league with government
is at stake, “despite all his contacts with the President of the United
States, despite all his claims of friendship with the Director of the FBI”
(69). All Woltz can mutter after being sedated is “six hundred thousand
dollars”—the price of Khartoum. This Godfather villain has a balance
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                      189



sheet in mind as he parses out the injury done to him and the structures
he represents. His questions are more material and rational than Michael’s
prebattle cries that “business is personal” and that the degradation of the
common man is his daily lot. Yet the logic of the social melodrama de-
mands the blood of Khartoum, Sollozzo, and McCluskey, not the tunnel-
ing down into capitalist realities. Woltz may draw his conclusions on
behalf of unfettered capitalism as businessman and cold warrior, but the
readers and viewers are encouraged to vote the straight Corleone ticket
every time. Although Woltz may have Hoover for a friend, the Don is
cited as the best friend any Italian American citizen could ever have.
Historians and psychologists can grapple with the question of how this
“invisible” mob government so fascinates the American public that it
can’t get enough of it in popular melodrama while international commu-
nism was a shadow government causing a half-century of American
national paranoia. A quick guess is that backwater Sicily had no trap-
pings of “evil empire” and as no external nuclear and economic threat,
was perceived as no internal threat where the melodramatic structure
could turn the subject into an endless reader’s market and where the
Corleone business practices look disturbingly familiar.


     The Constitutional Convention of “Our Gang”

      The richly dialogized and accented scene of the Dons’ “Constitu-
tional Convention” in The Godfather (287–93) shows how business mu-
tates into nothing less than American statecraft itself, with full reference
to history and politics. The Dons often rail against the American govern-
ment that opposes them, but they have become their own nation state
beyond the boundaries of business and accrue to themselves the highest
powers of male authority: those of “founding Fathers” with a self-
contained world as American as 1776 or 1787.
      Melodrama is a powerful form in The Godfather that tilts the novel
of business not only into an underside of family wars and personal scores
to settle but onto a hyperbolic plane of mutated structures. Such is al-
ways the ability of popular fiction to place the narrative of sentiment and
sensation “set against the backdrop of [war, business, politics]” that
empties out these collective subjects to feed the personal.4 Another way
that The Godfather as a novel of business can be deflected toward more
familiar American image for the reader/viewer is to cast Don Corleone
in the role of an American statesman, nothing less than a “father of his
country,” a political figure who rises in time of crisis to manage affairs
in the interests of all the people. Not the least of The Godfather’s powerful
American fantasies is precisely that of the Mafia as not so much a crimi-
nally marauding business sucking the life out of the real economy but
rather as a “state” with its own rights, treaties, and problems. In fact,
190                              Chapter 6



Vito Corleone consolidates his power and authority in the 1930s as the
depression threatens to break America apart. Even as “honest men begged
for work in vain” “from contemptuous officialdom,” “the men of Don
Corleone walked the streets with their heads held high, their pockets
stuffed with silver and paper money” (215). The Don’s New Deal works
very well on the domestic front, “far better than his enemies ran the
greater world which continually obstructed his path.” He became advi-
sor to block groups of voters for candidates in state legislatures, city
offices, and Congress. “He consolidated this power with a far-seeing
statesmanlike intelligence,” sending boys to college who would become
lawyers, district attorneys, and judges, planning the future of “his em-
pire with all the foresight of a great national leader” in “the great war of
1933” (216, 217). Without ever crossing the line into any interaction with
this larger America, Puzo invests Vito Corleone with more ability than
Franklin Delano Roosevelt (also in a great domestic “war” in 1933); the
Don is also a “foreign” policy specialist who manages “to bring peace to
all the warring factions in New York City and then in the nation,” cul-
minating in Puzo’s grandiose claim that the Don’s problems were those
of “other great rulers and lawgivers in history” (222). When “peace and
harmony reign” in New York City by 1937 after selective Corleone may-
hem, the Don notes with dismay the coming of Hitler and the fall of
Spain; by 1939, the Don becomes the “underworld apostle of peace.”
Characterized as “more successful than any Pope,” he hammers out a
working agreement amongst the most powerful underworld organiza-
tions in the country. Puzo brazenly calls it a “Constitution” which “re-
spected fully the internal authority of each member in his state or city”
(224). From rampant fear and murder, we pass dizzyingly to papal au-
thority and founding government documents without ever considering
what the consent of the governed might mean. The final allegorical detail
is sprung in the neat reverse parallel universe: “And so when World War
II broke out in 1939, when the United States joined the conflict in 1941,
the world of Don Vito Corleone was at peace, in order, fully prepared to
reap the golden harvest on equal terms with all the other industries of a
booming America.” The Corleone family then has a hand in all the black
market food stamps, gasoline stamps, and travel priorities” (224). The
ironic shadow world that the Don manages calls for equal parts CEO,
executioner, law giver, visionary, and freebooter, one who marches di-
agonally across history in his own interests. He’s beyond both patriotism
and personal appeal. The world stage has his play always running in a
corner of the set, always finely tuned in its improvisations and revisions
to the drama on that main stage.5
      It’s at the Dons’ “Constitutional Convention” that Vito Corleone
makes his most far reaching pronouncements about business and gov-
ernment from within the melodramatic form. Puzo sets the scene with
considerable care in a clandestine summit meeting in a commercial bank
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                      191



director’s conference room. The Dons sit gravely and calmly under a
portrait of founding father Alexander Hamilton, the conservative finan-
cial genius of the early American republic (280). The mob rulers are
depicted as heroic individualists who have “refused to accept the rule of
organized society, men who refused the dominion of other men.” They
“guarded their free will with wiles and murder. Their wills could be
subverted only by death. Or the utmost reasonableness” (287). Surely
free will has never been defended with more persuasive weapons. “Free
will” to Puzo is the Dons’ license to threaten mayhem against any en-
emy; no “reasonableness” in the novel is divorced from murder’s im-
plied threat. Puzo’s “casual irony,” the complacent author’s implied
commentary, is a kind of bella figura of the moral life, as “reasonableness”
and “free will” become markers in a fallen world of signification.
       The portrait of Hamilton brooding over the scene legitimates the
gathering of mobsters as serious and concerned high capitalists hoping
to carve out a pact that will enable their “nation” to prosper. Puzo’s
choice of Hamilton is either lucky or inspired. In the Revolutionary War
period, he “made his bones” on every level of American life. Born out of
wedlock in 1755 on the Caribbean island of Nevis, he was orphaned,
then sent to America by a benefactor to be educated. He was an officer
on Washington’s staff by 1777 and as a colonel persuaded Washington to
let him lead an assault on a British position at Yorktown in 1781, the
same year he wrote his first treatise on public finance. Hamilton was
the financial architect of the new nation during its first decades and led
the American Treasury Department (established 1789). He exhibited sound
and conservative principles as he sought ways for the young nation to
improve and manage the flow of revenue. Hamilton believed that a small
class of old families, including merchant-shipowners and financiers along
the East Coast, should be permanently installed as government’s staunch
allies. Samuel Eliot Morison stated that Hamilton wished to “give the
people who controlled America’s wealth a distinct interest in its perma-
nence” (Morison 323). Such a profile well describes Don Corleone’s “his-
toric” maxim at the Dons’ congress that “we will manage our world for
ourselves because it is our world, cosa nostra“ (293). The prevailing his-
torical view is of Hamilton as a visionary who brought financial order
out of chaos, concentrating power in the few, believing in a governing
elite. He had little use for the competing American vision of Jeffersonian
democracy, which he feared as the ultimate anarchy in the making. The
irony is that the Corleones and their mob compatriots are the beneficia-
ries of the extension of democracy in the vast waves of European emigra-
tion that punctuate the beginning of the American twentieth century.
Vito Corleone stands at the financial pinnacle of the mob empire in The
Godfather espousing Hamilton’s fiscally sound policies but living under
Jefferson’s egalitatrian dispensation. One suspects it was not lost on Puzo
that Hamilton of all the Founding Fathers stood most outside the country’s
192                              Chapter 6



radical republican rhetoric as its most “managerial” figure or that he
died in a melodramatic duel with Vice President Aaron Burr in 1804.
When Michael tells Kay that maybe he’s just “one of those real old-
fashioned conservatives they grow up in your hometown” (366), he may
be gesturing toward the New England Adams connection, but his father
more surely resembles the prudent New York urban financier Hamilton
in Puzo’s fanciful American mythography, an anti-republican immigrant
banker for the mob and its exclusive interests. Thus does Puzo inscribe
American crime, business, and history in a rhetorical mix of accents. Vito
Corleone would be the immigrant Hamilton would most fear, but he
would admire his financial and organizational acumen.
      The speeches made by the Dons show the accumulated wisdom of
the cautious old men who have survived their reigns of murder and
mayhem to now stand at the pinnacle of a business network too impor-
tant to be left unregulated. Rather than the young firebrands of the
American 1770s, these men are true conservators and mappers of terri-
tory. Once more, it’s difficult to gauge what Puzo means by the repetition
in this scene of several of the novel’s most pointed signifieds about the
nature of mob predation. For example, Don Corleone utters the by-now
familiar lines from Woltz and Kay, “What would the world come to if
people kept carrying grudges against all reason?” (287). More to the
point, what is this novel coming to if Puzo has the Don and Woltz mouth-
ing the same sentiments? Is the statement then given more weight? Is
Woltz redeemed in some way? Has the Don become just another queru-
lous capitalist, an old, cranky mob father who’s lost a son? Puzo does not
seem to realize or care that his hero and villain hold similar political
views, or if he does care, he’s not enough of an author-in-charge to make
the pattern meaningful. Don Barzini, the Corleones’ arch foe and the
architect of their misfortune, repeats another Woltz line when he says
“we’re not communists after all” (288); he is finally shot to death in
Michael’s orchestrated assasinations as he “stood over a bed on which
lay a young girl. . . . Rocco pumped four bullets into his belly” (430) in a
replica of Woltz’s Hollywood attack on the starlet. The “Don of Detroit”
adds the familiar litany, “We just can’t let people do as they please”; he’s
“tender-hearted” like Sonny but also tells the assembled mobsters that
they shouldn’t worry about selling drugs to “the dark people, the col-
ored” because they’re “animals” (290). Is Puzo using some comparative
rhetoric here, saying that these views from mob “elder statesmen” are
very mainstream American, from the prejudices to the law-and-order
conservatism? At some level, he’s doing just that, but I think it’s rather
his inability to create more than a few signifieds. Characters in The God-
father repeat key phrases and views not in an intricate doubling or a
pointed comparative satire of American institutions but because Puzo
has nothing more to say on the matter beyond Woltz’s intimations early
in the novel. Don Corleone conducts business on a specific scale of con-
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                      193



cern. He ironically joins Woltz in condemning rogue elements and vio-
lent intiatives. However much Jack Woltz is the anti–Don Corleone in
personal life and decadent practice, they both argue quite convincingly
for a conservative freemarket capitalism and the monopolist right to do
whatever they deem necessary. That’s Puzo’s oft-repeated fictional con-
clusion on the matter, and he sticks to it.
      It’s the rendering of the Don as a statesman in a quite self-conscious
historical frame that gives Puzo the opportunity to legitimate Vito
Corleone’s vision and Americanness. The aura of the Dons’ Convention
is rich with accents of nation-building at the table under Hamilton’s
portrait. In a speech that Puzo self-consciously historicizes as “famous”
prior to its delivery by a “far-seeing statesman,” Don Corleone begins,
“What manner of men are we then, if we do not have our reason?” (292).
“Reason” in The Godfather very pointedly calls up the Enlightenment
tenets that drove the framers of the Constitution such as Hamilton and
the Virginians to hammer out the documents and agreements that solidi-
fied the American nation. Don Corleone continues:

     Let me say that we must always look to our interests. We are
     all men who have refused to be puppets dancing on a string
     pulled by the men on high. We have been fortunate here in this
     country. Already most of our children have found a better life.
     Some of you have sons who are professors, scientists, musi-
     cians, and you are fortunate. Perhaps your grandchildren will
     become the new pezzonovanti. . . . But we have to progress with
     the times. The time is past for guns and killings and massacres.
     We have to be as cunning as the business people, there’s more
     money in it and it’s better for our children and grandchildren.
           As for our own deeds, we are not responsible to the .90
     calibers, the pezzonovantis who take it upon themselves to
     decide what we shall do with our lives, who declare wars they
     wish us to fight in to protect what they own. . . . We will
     manage our world for ourselves because it is our world, cosa
     nostra. (292–93)

      Of course, this is a dream of the freest agency, which also demon-
izes a “they” as the unnamed “men on high” who are the true enemies
of unbridled mob commerce and control. The speech pulls at very tradi-
tional American patriotic and life world comforts. The time for guns and
killing is over, and civilization nominally reigns, as in 1787 with the
British vanquished and laws to be shaped for the new country. Children
have prospered and have become artists and professionals. But progress
also means learning to steal within the law, to be as “cunning” as the
“business people,” the post–Civil War architects of the national future.
The echoes and accents here stretch back to the American colonies taking
194                              Chapter 6



umbrage with “men on high” in Britain and forward into the modern
postindustrial America. Weaving through the sentiments are family mem-
bers: sons, children, grandchildren. To yoke “manage” to “our world” is
to join both a cosmos and a bureaucratic regulating of it. “Our World”
equals America itself: Don Corleone holds this to be self-evident as well
as the Dons’ privileged place. Such an enormous subjectivizing of an
individual’s proprietary rights has reference to Gillian Brown’s view of
the American logic of “possessive individualism” in which she traces
DeTocqueville’s projection in the liberal democratic state evolving out of
Locke and Hobbes that “every man has property in himself and, thus,
the right to manage himself, his labor, and his property as he wishes.”
Brown calls this “a market society’s construction of Self” and one
foregrounded by the American Declaration and Constitution in which
government would protect rights of self-determination (2). The Dons take
advantage of their freedom to be rapacious within it while they cast the
government and regulation in America as their enemies, the successors
to land-holding Sicilian oppressors. The great leap is from control of self
and property, incarnated in family, to the whole world both personalized
and miniaturized under their control, a powerful and pervasive, if not
particularly moral or idealistic version of the American Dream.
      The Godfather claims the authority to address very powerful historical
constructions of American democracy and privilege. Melodrama shifts the
questions of “managing” (a bourgeois term with echoes of Alger)) into
divining the forces of good and evil. Melodrama itself always leads to an
exceptionalism in which all economic, social, and cultural battles are per-
sonalized into the drama of the present where the intensity of the familiar/
familial is everything. Indeed, the Don’s speech suddenly shifts from the
vision of “Our World” to his own family. He’s willing to make a lasting
peace, he says, but only if he can guarantee Michael’s return from Sicily as
a free man. He states that he will take it personally if Michael is struck by
lightning, if he should catch a “mortal fever,” if his plane or ship should
go down (294). Yet he concludes again, “are we not better men than those
pezzonovanti who have killed countless millions of men in our lifetimes”
(294)? When Don Corleone sits down, the other Dons applaud him and
rise to kiss his cheek. He has equated all world strife with public men (the
absent figures would include not only the known monsters Hitler and
Stalin but also, presumably, Roosevelt and Churchill among others). What’s
terrifying but compelling is the “statesmanlike” rhetoric that dissociates
everyone in the room from any war that America might undertake. Any
collective goal of American society, or any freely chosen or thoughtfully
embraced allegiance to the new country is never even a possibility. “The
men on high” is the catch-all signifier for American power, as is “our
world,” and there will be no interpenetration. The Dons then become at
their convention the rulers of their postwar world in America, an entity
they know as almost a parallel universe.
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                    195



      What Puzo never cares to accomplish are the dialogic possibilities
of such a transformative encounter between America and the mob, how
the immigrant sons might be caught up in American idealism or open-
ness and modify rhetoric or praxis in unexpected ways. Instead, the
promise of freedom in the nation is to let the Dons operate with impu-
nity in the shadows, which, of course may be the very dispensation to
business itself in America. Such would indeed be a hard saying. The Dons
reign between the poles of communism and anarchy, between state con-
trol and total lawlessness. They are conservators, good American busi-
ness men, prudent and far-seeing.
      Puzo’s verbal and conceptual repertoire at such moments is scant
and contradictory. He certainly does not want to stress the hypocrisy of
the Dons. Within three pages, pezznovanti is uttered in three contexts: as
what or who their granchildren might become, as the arbiters of where
and whom and how these men are governed in America, and as murder-
ers of millions in the 1930s and 1940s. Puzo goes back to such a word
because it’s an all-purpose equivalent of big shot. He’s seldom concerned
with verbal precision, nor is the repetititon supposed to cohere in an
irony that would disentangle the concepts of the role of government in
relation to the governed or constituted authority set against those who
would flout it. Recall Puzo invoking the pope and the Constitution in the
same paragraph in which Don Corleone was a Johnny Appleseed of
conciliation traveling the United States in the 1930s (224). Puzo portrays
the Don and his associates as broadly as possible, providing them with
signifiers that quickly and extrinsically convey both moral power and
political legitimacy, regardless of context. The mob’s Constitutional Con-
vention can become whatever the reader wants it to be—a boardroom
meeting, a town hall assembly, a primer on political policy, a father’s
plea for his son. By starting at the high end of inflated signification,
melodrama always has a surfeit of sensational capital on hand to portray
these “businessmen” in any moral context necessary.


            Destiny as Authorizing Melodrama

      Destiny appears as supple and profligate a term as can be found in
The Godfather, and Puzo invokes it in both general and specific terms.
There’s a “general destiny” in America to join or refrain from (365);
Michael’s “curious destiny” is to replace his father (411). Vito Corleone
is ready “to start on his destiny” when he decides to kill Fanucci (203).
Sonny’s destiny is to become a murderer, even though as a boy he was
truly tenderhearted (266); his destiny was decided when he saw his fa-
ther kill Fanucci, causing the Don to observe, “Every man has one des-
tiny” (222). Whether the will of absent gods or the fated result of a
human action, destiny in The Godfather is always played in an emotional
196                              Chapter 6



and powerful register, the force that trumps cause and effect with great
consequences. Destiny is irrevocable, a course of events in which the
actors walk through large motions in an imposed inevitability. In popu-
lar fiction, destiny is conveniently decreed by authorial fiat, often out of
context and specifying neither a good or evil course, merely one “des-
tined.” Destiny can never be character-based or rooted in character de-
velopment. Most often, the “destined” character conceives his course as
a natural fulfillment of some fated wrong or good. Self-annointed, the
destined character forgets immediately that his destiny has been made
out of history’s manipulations and circumstance. Realism’s web of con-
nections spun in any life-world is elided through destiny’s plot victories.
A-historical though it appears, destiny emerges out of history’s random-
ness itself, a capstone opinion as to why what happened has happened
or will happen.
       On the one hand, Vito Corleone—illiterate, oppressed, terrorized—
emerges from a Sicily where his ancestors had been peasants for a thou-
sand years. He escapes that predetermined course but not without being
deeply marked by a mistrust of all governments, authority, and social
bonds. In truth, he is perhaps “destined” to mistrust America and its forms
and promises. On the other hand, to be an immigrant is to follow a fated
narrative already in place—the flight from one country to another, the loss
of tradition however oppressive, including family, language, customs, food,
culture, and environment. The immigrant is trading one history for a blank
slate in another that is yet conditioned by the immigrant’s presence in a
land predisposed to consign him to “immigrant” status and by the past
that he carries forward into a new destiny. To place the dynamic in Corleone
terms and family, the immigrant passes from a pawn with an absolute lack
of freedom and individuality in Sicily into a pawn within the capacious
idealism of an America that in its rhetoric is dedicated to erasing precisely
the fated circumstance of the immigrant’s experience up to the moment of
arriving in America itelf. Once in America, the immigrant’s new history
may begin. However, Puzo conceives of the Corleones conceiving them-
selves still in patterns of destiny; their personalities and experience pre-
pares them however incongruously for the pure possibility of America,
destiny’s New World child.
       If destiny forgets that it has been made, so does America itself.
Fisher cites the power of the American “Manifest Destiny,” the wedding
of “self-evident” status to American dominion over the continental land-
scape in the nineteenth century, and the fiction and history written out
of this impulse.6 As he says gnostically, once destiny is manifest, the
writing of history can begin, as well as that of historical fiction (25), and
he cites examples from Parkman, Longfellow, and Cooper on clearing of
the land of Native Americans that marks a period when history is inau-
gurated by a series of massacres. Once violence and appropriation are
safely consigned to prehistory by history and fiction, the nation can build.
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                    197



The Corleone empire may begin with the killing of Fanucci, a neighbor-
hood figure of no great import, but through this act, Vito Corleone estab-
lishes himself as a man of reason, not as a murderer, but as a force
backed by the threat of a massacre, a latent primitivism that will surely
destroy those who do not sustain the fiction with him of civilized dia-
logue and compromise. Thus murder is not destiny but inaugurates
destiny and is a malevolent god or first cause. Perhaps the most stunning
acting by Al Pacino in Godfather I is in the few seconds before Michael
kills Solozzo and McCluskey in the Italian restaurant. Whole worlds
appear to pass before his eyes as he lives through what has led up to this
act and what may flow from it. His unfocused stare is abstracted yet
terribly dramatic as, adrenaline pumping, destiny is about to be made
manifest. His gun shots rip open bodies, he drops the gun on the floor,
the Nino Roti score hits bottomless tragic notes, and Michael stumbles
out to a waiting getaway car. The college boy/war hero disappears for-
ever in an instant. Michael has joined the family business in vintage
melodramatic fashion. Puzo did not stop to make much of this scene in
the novel, but Coppola knew how to frame and underscore destiny’s
moment. He understood the defining act as Michael begins his real life
and all else falls away.
      In mob narrative, murders are public declarations of vocation and
authority, as surely as a diploma hung on a wall or office space rented
out and a name placed upon a door. Furthermore, murder is “self-evident,”




     Michael Corleone (Al Pacino) begins his destiny (Godfather I).
        Courtesy Museum of Modern Art/Film Still Archive.
198                              Chapter 6



destiny made “manifest,” a revealing-as-present. American exceptionalism
becomes the individual’s violent exceptionalism. For a Sicilian peasant
used to thinking in terms of negative destiny, to be lifted into the Ameri-
can manifest destiny is to retain absolutist belief in its power but to
wholly shift its registers. In terms of a historical pre-condition to des-
tined explanation and status, the Corleones come singularly equipped on
several counts. Barzini refers to the Italian believing himself to be a
“unique specimen of humanity,” a “distinct personality deserving special
consideration,” believing himself for “intricate and improbable reasons”
to be one of God’s favorite sons (79). As Michael tells Kay, his father rises
above rules not meant for men like him, men of “extraordinary force and
character” (365). A democratic exceptionalism—you are predestined be-
cause you think you are—may be endorsed by the gods or by self-election.
Barzini points out that such Italian compulsions to make everyone feel as
if he were privileged is often compensatory behavior for a deeper, bleak
outlook on life and fate (75).
      Coincident to the Italian destino is the popular fictional drive to
portray American capitalist heroes as personally driven characters who
override constraints to succeed because of some innate vision and tal-
ents. Their “world” is too small or cramped to contain them, and they
must seize what amounts to their destiny. As Elizabeth Long remarks,
“like Calvinists predestined for salvation they are earmarked for suc-
cess” (72). Such is the prescription for writers and capitalist heroes from
Dreiser’s Cowperwood and London’s Buck in Call to the heroes of Rand
and Robbins. This prescription is disguised in the displaced religious
code heroes of General Lew Wallace’s Ben Hur (1880) through those of
Lloyd C. Douglas (Magnificent Obsession [1929], The Robe [1942]) and the
popes and towering artists of Irving Stone.7 Rivals to The Godfather for
most influential popular novel of the twentieth century also feature im-
probable capitalist heroes: the calm, natural gentleman cowboy-executive-
in-training in Owen Wister’s The Virginian (1901) and Mitchell’s Scarlett
O’Hara in Gone with the Wind, a born (destined?) businesswoman, if
unlucky in love and marriage.
      In writing of the individual’s right to regulate himself in a market
society, Brown talks of this society’s “construction of self, a self aligned
with market relations such as exchange value, inalienability, circulation,
and competition” (2). The Corleones, like any Americans, reinterpret these
relations for themselves. In Puzo’s hands, these relations comprise what
might be called a capitalist poetics, complete with epiphanies of the
peculiar market in which the Corleones function (the need to inaugurate
through murder, the ultimate weeding out of the competition, and priva-
tizing through family monopoly). Lawrence Stone cites two key char-
acteristics of the modern family as an intensified affective bonding of the
nuclear core at the expense of neighbors and kin as well as a “strong
sense of individual autonomy and the right to personal freedom in the
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                      199



pursuit of happiness” (Barnes 91). The Godfather binds everyone we care
about into the family and casts out all others. The Godfather then casts all
images of self-aggrandizement and personal choice under the bar of
destiny, from the fated state of being a poor, devastated Sicilian boy to
the fate of becoming a Don. Family and Destiny replace community/
country and personal responsibility. All march to several deep chords
(Italian, Popular, Melodramatic, American) that blend into one narrative
theme that becomes manifest. What happened had to happen and
did. “Self-evident” takes on the appearance of the most mythic and jus-
tifiable tautology.
       Furthermore, “what happened” is underscored as not only inevi-
table but just and proper. Fisher states that “making familiar or making
ordinary is the radical ‘work’ done by popular forms” in historical and
sentimental novels (19). He submits that popular forms do cultural work
through recognition and repetition in creating a reality that returns over
and over again to central facts, which become “ordinary” (7). In The
Godfather, the litany is in the interplay of family, reason, and violence
done in the name of family after all reason fails. Again and again these
rhythms are played out to where the unimaginable (the murders) be-
comes the commonplace solution. Fisher knows that historical and sen-
timental forms depend more on images than on analysis. They work
through sensation defined through the sort of melodramatic tableaux
that work hardest to seduce the reader into affliliation. They are unfor-
gettable rather than multileveled and intelligent: the visceral impact of
Khartoum’s head in Woltz’s bed, Michael’s broken jaw, Sonny dead at
the toll booth, Apollonia exploded in the car are important lessons to
align the reader with the Corleone family. They far outweigh the Don’s
words or Puzo’s authorial commentary. These historical and sentimental
forms “often seem, when quoted in moments of self-analysis, stupid,
obtuse, commonplace” (20). Puzo’s attempts to explain his narrative, to
gloss his momentum and outcomes lead to the already-discussed banal
and defective causal chains on “destiny,” “reason,” and “death as a
foul traitor.”
       The hard fact at the core of The Godfather is that murder is the
family business. On the way to the Dons’ convention came the murders
of Fanucci, Sollozzo, and McCluskey, as well as countless others in a
cycle back to Corleone, Sicily, and “destined” oppression that started
Vito Andolini on his own course to America. Murder is the core of the
family business, but the historical frame of “Founding” is most deeply,
historically American, while the “Family” frame is the most sympathetic
of all American collective signs. The immigrant, in effect, must always
murder self as well, perform an act of forgetting that is most self-evident
as well as inevitable. The immigrant saga has a rigid phenomenological
and narrative form with the loss of so much of the core culture and that
which constitutes personality and shapes character. “Coming to America”
200                              Chapter 6



is indeed a “general destiny” as well as a determinism that can only be
written about through a vale of tears, in a melodrama that is extreme,
rather than mimetic, since the immigrant possesses no social, linguistic,
or cultural baseline to be “re-presented.” In this morally fluid melodra-
matic universe, Saving the Family becomes synonomous with Murdering
Our Enemies. The setting of the novel itself resembles that of a frontier
tale: the Corleone compound or fortress, Don Corleone and Sonny am-
bushed, Tom Hagen abducted and held in capitivity, Michael escaping
into exile and returning, border skirmishes and deaths mounting on each
side, emissaries and captured warriors. Genres are truly able to mix and
match through melodrama.
       Fisher’s most suggestive phrase speaks to how images in popular
forms “invaded and then ordered massive, unsorted psychic materials”
(20). Hard Facts centers on the “colonization” of the “national mind” of
characters and images such as Cooper’s Indians and frontiersmen, Stowe’s
Topsy and Uncle Tom, and Dreiser’s Carrie to provide powerful and en-
during pictures of the frontier, the slave plantation, and the American city
of 1900 (20–21). Fisher’s verbs of choice are invade and order, the rhythm of
colonizing in its effective life-world power. The Godfather performs these
rhythms again and again in an interpenetration of immigrant, family,
business, and national materials. The real melting pot in The Godfather
contains Puzo’s amalgam of crime, business, and family in sentiment and
sensation, melodrama’s twin muses. The Corleone family functions as a
corporate entity with its eye on profits, expansion, and rivals, but just as
surely that corporation begins to pressure the Corleones into contorted
roles as Sonny tries to live up to being a Don, Michael is recalled from
America to work for the family, and Vito Corleone is critically wounded.
Just as surely the Old World sense of a negative destiny under the heel of
a feudal oppression is reordered into a positive American destiny of indi-
vidual exceptionalism and the radical freedom to become. The Corleones
inexorably drive to authority in a country that believes in its collective
destiny: to “make manifest” beyond all reasonable doubt and to do so
within violence that is “just business.” No wonder Puzo’s mob narrative
has become a compelling version of our national story.


         The Corleone Logic of the Sentimental:
                Women’s Roles Usurped

      Saving the Corleone family becomes a greater narrative pleasure
for the popular reader than grasping the management of the Corleone
world. The blanket genius of The Godfather is that Puzo weds the impera-
tives of the historical novel in nation building and eliminating rival
claims—in “authorizing” or “inaugurating”—to the imperatives of the
sentimental novel in establishing bonds of a social disposition, to create
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                      201



in the reader a caring about the Corleones and their prevailing as indi-
viduals. The bonding with the family is intense and precisely locates
their suffering within the family unit. The death of Sonny, the shooting
of Don Corleone, Michael’s return to the family, the abuse of Connie and
the sacrifice of her husband to Michael’s revenge, Kay’s conversion to
grave knowledge of Michael’s role and nature—these outcomes view the
family’s story in the harsh and fated violence of historical fiction (what
did happen, what had to happen) through the more emotional lens of
sentimental fiction (who was victimized, who grieved) to the ultimate
melodramatic climax (we have been wronged; vengeance is ours!).
       Barnes has written that “to read sympathetically becomes synonomous
with reading like an American” and that “sociopolitical issues are cast as
family dramas” in American life and letters from the eighteenth century
onward (2). Surely the enduring American rhetorical insistence on “the
people,” derived by essayists and philosophers building on John Locke’s
Essay concerning Human Understanding” (1690) with its repeated references
to an epistemology of sensation, goes far toward establishing that personal
affiliations nurtured through the senses could be as important a part of a
person’s moral compass as reason itself and could not be divorced from it.
Hume and Adam Smith attempt to make sentiment a fundament of moral
judgment, in effect, tuning Locke’s view of sensations to a social and evalu-
ative key, preparing the way for the American political rhetoricians such
as Jefferson and Tom Paine.
       We have seen above how Don Corleone speaks to the other Dons
as a statesman embodying a fiscally conservative ethic amongst immi-
grant partriarchs in a democratically sanctioned lawlessness within a
very recognizable business framework. What has not yet been stressed is
how personal and familial an aura this speech has and how intertwined
it is with family. What Barnes calls “the domestication of paternal au-
thority” in America (9–10), the move of such relations from “coercive to
consensual,” is what the Corleones model again and again in popular
fiction. Michael’s passage in the novel is to surrender himself to the
father, to become the father with the father’s blessings, to do for him at
personal cost. The Godfather posits this oddly anti-Freudian passage as
seamless and natural; Michael’s early affiliation with America is easily
overturned. The Old World virtues maintained become the rather
conflictless merging with the Father, to become him and do his work.
Barnes’s writing centers on early American fiction and is most concerned
with the construction and supression of the feminine subject within the
patriarchal family tale, the way in which sympathy circulates in an inces-
tuous dynamic. In Puzo’s transformation, Michael does not kill the father
but assumes his role, which is also that of nurturing force.
       The Godfather suggests a total usurpation of women’s roles by the
central male characters in a sentimental take-over. Mama Corleone has
no first name. Kay is not only stripped of her individuality but is recycled
202                             Chapter 6



into the most Catholic of the novel’s women. Lucy Mancini is a restruc-
tured sex organ in Puzo’s endless sophomoric Rabelaisian conceit. Connie
is a sad pawn in the family’s business, a character finally resurrected
from victimization along with Kay by Puzo and Coppola in Godfather III,
when, presumably, it was finally audience-prudent to install some mea-
sure of female agency to the narrative.
      To rail against the marginalization of women in The Godfather ac-
complishes little because massive male domination has been felt from the
outset of the narrative’s reception by readers and filmgoers. What is key,
though, is to account for the work’s popularity with women readers and
viewers as well, since the decades-long American fascination with the
Corleones has hardly been masculine alone. Clearly the novel and films
make the wider audience identify with the family itself against its en-
emies; readers are converted from configuring the Corleones as “other”
(foreign, criminal, violent, sexist) to “same” (parents, children, victims,
reasonable men). Such conversions are initially resisted by the ironic and/
or ideological critic who sees them as co-opting readerly energies, who
may want to intervene on behalf of the novel’s silenced family of women
characters or on behalf of the faceless victims not even created by Puzo,
anyone the family holds in terror to its ends. Fisher tries to account for
the seduction of the reader in a text such as The Godfather by stating that
the psychology of the oppressor, when rendered from the inside or when
it’s all the perspective the reader is allowed, is always a humanizing
narration. Fisher calls it the “Romance of Consciousness” and opposes it
to the Sentimental Novel in focusing on heroic villains rather than sen-
timental victims (91–99). What he doesn’t acknowledge is the way in
which sentimental narration sanctions the victim to become the oppressor
in a newly inscribed romance of consciousness. Such a conversion is the
Great Consciousness Shift in popular fiction: the moment in which the
victim of some horrible wrong, so atrocious, so utterly and destructively
unfair, one perpetrated by an oppressive gender, race, class, society, cul-
ture, government, impersonal or personal enemy, is instantly given an
enormous fund of righteous moral capital to expend on revenge for the
remainder of the novel. This vengeance can be carried out slowly, accord-
ing to an unfolding master plan, or in one moment of violence. Contem-
porary social melodrama favors a psychologically traumatized character
who will stop at nothing to carry out this counterplot against the one
who has damaged him or her.8
      Not all such revivified victims are rehabilitated. They may remain
the torturers of the innocent, the malignant others plaguing benign he-
roes and heroines. However, when they perform their acts in the name
of family, the potential to win the hearts of the audiences is immense.
The Corleones are constant companions to their reader-viewers; we are
never out of their point of view. We are in to them like the supplicants
on Connie’s wedding day. Nothing happens in Puzo’s text that is not
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                      203



directly related to their survival, their power, their sense of well-being or
danger. To a great degree, we are in the parlor world of Mrs. Stowe or
in the interiors of Margaret Mitchell, but the oppression and war talk is
quite different. The evils of slavery or Yankees have been replaced as
debate topics by the dialogues of men at work, plotting, The oppressed
have been given full sanction to become the oppressors, and Auden is
validated: those to whom evil is done do evil in return. This basic moral
balance is the most blatant of melodramatic truisms as well as a flat-line
justice that an audience of feeling can applaud. The true morality play
that all vengeance narratives enact is, of course, that the victim must
“become like them” to achieve desired ends. Having achieved these ends,
the ruins are all around. Such consciousness pervades war novels and
films most strongly as the survivors look for a sign of the virtues and
precepts that sent them into battle in the first place for a “way of life”
that most often is coded strongly through the protection of women, chil-
dren, and family.9
      To test out Puzo’s 1996 confession that Don Corleone possessed a
remembered maternal voice within a patriarchal control over the family’s
lives and fortunes, what scenes in the novel provide the best evidence?
In the transactions with Amerigo Bonasera, Don Corleone is brought into
his most intimate relations to life and death. The Don and the undertaker
interact because of the bodies of their children at risk in life and death;
the services they require are personal and intimate. The novel opens with
Amerigo Bonasera (“America Good Evening”) begging the Don on his
daughter’s wedding day to take the lives of the two WASP teenagers
who brutally assaulted her. As is discussed in detail in chapter 4, the Don
takes the occasion to instruct Bonasera in how to approach him with all
due respect in a personal relationship. Finally, Bonasera bows his head in
fealty, and the Don concludes that Bonasera will have justice. Then he
utters the famous, “Some day, and that day may never come, I will call
upon you to do me a service in return. Until that day, consider this justice
a gift from my wife, your daughter’s godmother” (33). This transference
of the Don’s favor appears as a courtesy but more strongly suggests the
aura of the feminine and maternal. The melodramatic language of this
opening section has Bonasera weeping bitter tears, the Don being “gentle,
patient” (32) as he labors to make this parental petitioner see his true role
in America. The Don should be all things to him: bank, court, emotional
support. Finally, the Don assigns the “gift” as one from mother to mother,
woman to woman. Bonasera, an emotional man who identifies with
America itself, acts as agent for his abused daughter and his grieving
wife, while the Don acts for his own wife. As Puzo says about his mother,
“the Don’s courage and loyalty came from her; his humanity came from
her” (The Fortunate Pilgrim xii). Scenes such as the Bonasera exchange
show how Puzo either consciously or unconsciously framed Don Corleone
within this usurped maternal imaginary.
204                              Chapter 6



       In the opening wedding day scenes with Bonasera, the Don in-
structs the undertaker as to correct life conduct. Bonasera, who wishes to
become American too quickly, to shake hands in a “good evening,” per-
haps, also is too eager to call for the death of the two guilty teenagers
because death is his business. Yet death is also Vito Corleone’s business
day by day in measured decisions. The Don holds death as last resort,
although his “reason” is nothing without that implied threat and fear.
For Bonasera, death is something normal and easy. His job is to brush life
back into death for funerals, in effect, becoming the maternal force giving
life to death. Late in the same evening, when Genco asks the Don to save
him, saying that the flesh is falling off his bones, the Don replies that he
“has no such powers” (47); the novel’s logic suggests that it’s Bonasera
who performs his craft for the last moments before the body is put in the
earth. The embalmer is an artist but menial in comparison to the man
who can grant wishes and fulfill destinies.
       Bonasera’s “good evening” finally comes when Sonny Corleone is
gunned down at the toll booth. Hagen calls a nervous Bonasera to tell
him that the Don will be arriving in an hour, that it’s time for him to
repay his Don. The scene takes place in the back “work” room of
Bonasera’s funeral parlor, where the business of death is transacted. This
parlor is the commercialized trace of the domestic lying-in at home in the
nineteenth-century parlor, the American middle-class room for weddings
and funerals. And here Puzo gives us a funeral evening to match the
opening wedding day. When Sonny’s wrecked body is trundled in to
Bonasera’s work room, the Don appears behind the stretcher: “his hair
seemed thin over his massive skull. He looked older, more shrunken
than when Bonasera had seen him at the wedding.” In effect, the Don
has now become Gencolike, “older, more shunken” (259); he now needs
an “old friend,” even as Genco had begged the Don to help him stave off
death. In the earlier scene, the Don had taken evasive action. He had
refused the rhetorical and politicized suggestions of the dying man that
they were old confederates in death. In that earlier scene, the Don had
ushered all of Genco’s women out of the room and had become the sole
nurse and mourner. Here again, over the body of a dead male child, it’s
the two men who keep vigil as women. The Don asks Bonasera to use all
his powers “as you love me” for “I do not wish his mother to see him
as he is” (259). The earlier “gift” to Bonasera had been to his wife; now
the Don asks for a gift for his own wife, Sonny’s mother. Extraordinary
that the business of caring for the dead should devolve upon the two
men. Women are not present at such times, nor are they needed; the
intimacies are between the death bringer and the death-in-life artist. The
Don’s remark refers to the grotesque body but also should remind the
reader,”see him [Sonny] as he is-—murdered son and murderer, born of a
murderous father.” To sublimate that truth, all possible sentimental fram-
ing is employed to make the Don humble, pathetic, maternal.
                        The Godfather and Melodrama                      205



       The mourning over the ruin of Sonny, his first born, brings the Don
into a compassionate relation for one of the few times in the novel. He is
bereft of all authority with no one to kill, no one to reason with, no orders
to give. He is a supplicant himself on another family occasion, moving
from wedding day to a day of family death. Such a scene is as morally
fraudulent and yet emotionally powerful as any scene in The Godfather. It
provides no consolation or recovery and offers what Fisher calls “training
in pure feeling and response” that “[lie] at the heart of sentimental poli-
tics” (123). It’s most difficult for the reader to remember the Don’s culpa-
bility in death when he stands in pain at the undertaker’s worktable, taking
the full brunt of the grieving. Such a scene could be act 2 in any melo-
drama on any stage, the moment just before the victim cries out to the
heavens for redress or strength.
       Puzo concluded his preface to The Fortunate Pilgrim with a melodra-
matic lament about his own mother: “Behold how she was wronged”
(xiii). In the male adaptation, the Don’s final phrase to Bonasera weds the
historical novel plot to a sentimental identification in a moral blindness
that refuses to acknowledge his complicity: “See how they [italics mine]
have massacred my son” (259). The true terrors of the novel are never the
Don’s. Can Sonny’s dead body be suitably “fixed” like Michael’s face,
Johnny’s voice, Jules’s medical practice, Lucy’s vagina? Such physical
“fixing” is emblematic of everything “arranged” on a societal level in The
Godfather. What should be noted is how this scene punctuates the male
and paternal colonization of grief in the novel, the exclusion of women
from even this relation to their children, and the eerie male business over
children’s bodies in the name of the absent mother.
       When Connie Corleone accosts Michael as the murderer of her
husband, Carlo Rizzi, the transactions amongst dead bodies in the
Corleone home reaches its conclusion. Michael has ordered Carlo’s death
and has engineered the assassinations of the heads of the Five Families;
Sonny’s “massacre” is avenged. However, Connie bursts into the male
space of the Corleone “living room,” shrieking, “you lousy bastard, you
killed my husband. You waited until our father died. . . . You blamed him
about Sonny, you always did, everybody did. But you never thought
about me. You never gave a damn about me” (436). Connie has it right;
Michael doesn’t think about her, to be a Corleone daughter is to be dis-
posable. The novel has come full circle at conclusion. Connie, who was
married in the novel’s first pages, when her father dispensed favors in
her name on her wedding day, is now a widow and charges into the
house to accuse her brother of killing her husband. The violence has
wound its way in incestuous fashion throughout the family plot. Connie
speaks politically, joining Genco, Woltz, and Kay as truth-bringers about
Corleone real-world relations and crimes. Yet Michael can dismiss her as
hysterical, can for one last time answer Kay’s searching eyes with his
final denial that he is not a murderer. Nonetheless, Kay quickly realizes
206                               Chapter 6



the truth when he receives Clemenza and other family soldiers and body-
guards and is called “Don Michael” for the first time.
      Puzo frames her realization in a bella figura scene where the family
capos give him fealty. In Coppola’s framing, Kay is looking into the living
room from a hallway and sees the men massed there in formal recogni-
tion. Someone moves to close the door, barring the living space from her
in the film’s final frame, a door-closing that is repeated in Godfather II
when Michael slowly, coldly closes the glass back door on her desperate,
plaintive face, cutting her off from her children after her stealth visit to
the family compound in Lake Tahoe. In the novel, Kay sees Michael as
a Roman emperor, his body language proclaiming a “cold, proud power.”
Convinced that Connie is telling the truth, “she went back into the kitchen
and wept” (437). Excluded from the living room by her knowledge of the
truth and by the men’s dominion there, she can only join Connie in
complete irrelevancy.10 From funeral parlor to Corleone parlor, the women
do not stand a chance while the deadly men are humanized even more
by their grieving for the dead and honoring their Don. They are always
“at home.”
      There are few significations that Don Corleone does not ultimately
embody in the American experience within the melodramatic form, wholly
usurping in male authority all the various family roles of sympathy and
parental concern, yet acting swiftly and surely in the most sensational of
male arenas, as a businessman, a statesman, an immigrant success story,
a God, a father. He operates in a modern America in which the legacy of
Calvinism and predestination was expanded and historicized by Mani-
fest Destiny. A country that descends from Puritan patriarchs through
national messianic errands is surely a country with a readership that can
believe in a Don Corleone, can see in him the particular election from an
American exceptionalism, one reaching back to Founding Fathers in the
historical paradigm, to a “wartime” leader of men, to an immigrant
patriarch in the ethnic paradigm, to the self-made man in the success
story, to a father with sons, to a figure who can bring life or death but
who can also “manage” “our World.” A powerful affirming correspon-
dence amongst these traditional male roles accounts in full measure for
The Godfather’s sustained popularity. The male strain of melodrama fi-
nally effaces capitalist predation and alters it into cosmic force, just as its
sentimental strain in The Godfather changes murdering men into grieving
maternal substitutes performing the necessary rituals over their broken
children. The historical and sentimental novel forms that cross in The
Godfather authorize power and validate sympathies toward the most
powerful and popular family in American fictional history. The myopic
outcome within melodrama’s always excessive signification is the full
extension of that sympathy to the Corleones as oppressed family men on
the one hand and justified murderers on the other.
                       The Godfather and Melodrama                      207



      The Godfather’s unoriginal and repeatable large motions within
melodrama account for The Godfather’s power, its ordinariness in second-
ing the Spencerian optimistic power philosophy that has become the
twentieth-century business religion in America beyond any particular
epistemological or historical challenge to its authority. Corleones are born
into their American history by killing men. The Godfather’s popular ge-
nius is to turn such violent individual destiny into Manifest Destiny, a
familiar American conversion. Self-evident American truisms about busi-
ness and family within affective forms sanction the violence that allows
men the full take-over of sympathy from women as subjects and objects
without denying the powerful readerly identification. Despite all rea-
soned misgivings, Puzo’s audience can feel “at home,” “like,” and “same”
with the Corleones. We may have better angels in our nature, but
The Godfather does not summon them, nor do we feel their presence in
the text.
                  chapter seven


       The Corleones as “Our Gang”:
       The Godfather Interrogated by
           Doctorow’s Ragtime
Father had always felt secretly that as a family they were touched by an
extra light. He felt it going now. He felt stupid and plodding, available
simply to have done to him what circumstances would do.
                                                          —Doctorow, Ragtime

[Jack London was] the kind of writer who went to a place and wrote his
dreams into it, the kind of writer who found an idea and spun his psyche
around it. He was a workaday literary genius hack.
                      —Doctorow, Jack London, Hemingway, and the Constitution

      The completed struggle for survival and legitimacy in any histori-
cal novel must take on the character of destiny in the reader’s conscious-
ness and in the historical present. One way to contextualize and contest
Puzo’s picture of the Corleone hegemony in The Godfather is by way of
contrast with another historical novel, E. L. Doctorow’s Ragtime (1975),
which is as self-reflexive and multidimensional in its portrayal of Ameri-
can immigration and evolving power and authority as The Godfather is
monolithic. What happens when The Godfather or by extension any best-
selling novel is placed into dialogue with its elite fictional twin? What
can be learned by examining the novel against Ragtime, asking what
Puzo was doing and what he was eliding or refusing to comment upon?
The goal is not to use Ragtime as a club with which to beat The Godfather
in a canonical versus popular mimetic stakes game but to articulate the
full range of issues that both novels confront about American immigra-
tion, assimilation, and the family. A larger goal is to discuss how para-
digmatic popular and elite fictions presume to disclose about the
representations of these subjects. Taken together, Ragtime and The Godfa-
ther are the most powerful late-twentieth-century statements about an

                                     209
210                               Chapter 7



earlier European immigration, an American epic subject that has hereto-
fore not created the fictional or critical climate for excitement that the
tropes of Indian removal, slavery, women’s roles and rights, and the
frontier and its mythos have fostered in the last few decades. Puzo and
Doctorow both write when the melting pot had long been accepted as a
controlling American myth, but actually both novels appeared when deep
divisions within America contested such a myth: differences between
black and white, parent and child, young and old, civilian and military,
men and women, establishment and counterculture.
      The Godfather and Ragtime relentlessly cover the same terrain from
different viewpoints and fictional objectives. The Godfather exemplifies
the motions of popular fiction, while Ragtime shows how popular fictions
are created and how they work. Puzo creates an ur-father for the twen-
tieth century. Doctorow dismantles and reconstitutes the very notion of
a patriarchy. Puzo drives the hard fact of “killing a man” as inaugurating
and incorporating a line; Doctorow’s new hard fact is “creating an im-
age” as the father, the immigrant, is made up of broken initiatives and
American reconditioning of the figure. Puzo offers the truly strong man
as immigrant protagonist creating his own history. Doctorow makes
history itself his protagonist, the goal of characters being to point
themselves along its lines of force; the immigrant becomes metaphorical
and universal.
       Both novels imply historical forgetting, but only Doctorow makes it
the moral subject of his own acknowledgment. The whole structure of The
Godfather is about erasure of acts in favor of their forgetting. Puzo’s family
truly becomes “Our Gang,” the prototypical mob family in American fic-
tion. Doctorow’s Our Gang image concludes his book in the immigrant
socialist-turned-movie producer’s Beverly Hills intimation of the Little Ras-
cals, a willed melting pot group of kids for popular consumption that
belies the violence of Ragtime’s story and the victims strewn over its pages.
Ragtime’s deep ironic image of Our Gang ends the individualized suffering
tale of immigration as we know it.
      Puzo renders a historically capped figure, the heroic capitalist, and
fantasizes him as unremitting patriarchal hero. He sketches lightly in a
popular form of the realist-naturalist novel. Doctorow appropriates that
precise form for an ironic rendering backed by a liberal commitment to
history’s victims and threads his narrative through a postmodern depic-
tion of the birth of the replicated image culture. Puzo’s novel drives
through modern America without giving notice that a popular culture
exists, although becoming a great artifact and product of that culture. The
Godfather gives no sign that whole eras of history are turning over with
consequences; the only history that matters for Puzo is the history of the
Corleone family. The Godfather retains the status of immigrant and stub-
bornly keeps on point as one family’s triumph over its enemies. Such
heroic individualism exists as further grist for Doctorow to scrutinize as
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                       211



another exhausted category. In Ragtime, he clears the land of immigrants
and describes the process by which the melting pot is installed in popu-
lar culture through mediation and forgetting. The dialogue between a
popular classic and its elite subversion reveals to us how each fiction
discloses its messages through narratives that are alternately opaque and
concealing about aims and practices.


     Popular Fiction and Elite Fiction: A Contest?

       At the outset, it’s important to understand why a dialogue between
The Godfather and Ragtime is useful. Energy flows through such an exer-
cise when a critic attempts to describe one text by reference to another,
to find out what a text means through what it suppresses, in effect, to
define a novel by what it is not. Too often, elite novels are discussed by
taking their assumed complexity as far as the critic can go in one direc-
tion or another, either ideologically, structurally, or semantically. We fol-
low writers there to label their work as exceptional, singular or
unrepeatable, and we inscribe them in a “great tradition” of other such
singular, texts. With popular novels or best sellers, we use more prosaic
categories to deem them important. We may write that they “touch a
nerve” or express a “conventional wisdom” or a “false consciousness,”
that they “manage a conflict” or perfectly exemplify a subgenre. Con-
versely, although all popular fiction categories are always available for
elite fiction to provide ironic and self-reflexive commentary, it is assumed
that popular fiction steadfastly refuses to interrogate its own premises. A
critic might say that Doctorow would understand Puzo’s novel very well
as a late-twentieth-century example of sensation and sentiment, an ad-
venture tale of great violence in which nonetheless the central family
characters gather great sympathy from the readers. Popular fiction logic
expects the reader to affiliate with the Corleones, wants their cult to carry
the reader along through whatever they do. Ragtime puts the father and
businessman under scrutiny and deconstruction and hypothesizes that
hero in a constellation of other recognizable early-twentieth-century fig-
ures, all competing for imaginative space and self-definition in a novel
where no one can truly be identified as the protagonist. Ragtime would
suggest that Vito and Michael Corleone are not omnipotent or directing
their destinies but are subject to an array of forces and desires that end-
lessly loop them back into a collective that would make them part of an
ensemble of Americans caught in a particular time of history.
       Ragtime, of course, does not know the Corleones, but its dynamics
can explain them in different fictional rhetoric that can supply the miss-
ing social and historical context, which so abstracts this suspicious Sicil-
ian family and its activities. The Godfather hardly recognizes the historical
force fields of the early twentieth century and suggests little of what its
212                              Chapter 7



characters may be up against as immigrants in New York City. Ragtime
moves in the New York of Jacob Riis’s outrage at the harsh life of immi-
grants in slums filled with poverty and disease; Puzo is not interested.
The early years of Vito Andolini in Corleone, Sicily; the assassination of
his father, the hiding of the boy and his being shipped to America; the
arrival in New York city—all these subjects are covered in less than a
page in The Godfather (194). The murder of Vito Andolini’s mother, the
arrival at Ellis Island, the name mistakenly changed to “Corleone” by an
immigration officer—all is added in Coppola-Puzo’s screen version that
begins Godfather II. All the young life of Vito Corleone is centered on
learning about power and consolidating a neightborhood role. The God-
father is plot-driven by its hero’s rock-solid need to establish himself. Yet
it’s not an immigrant novel and partakes of little social realism or even
naturalistic, deterministic commentary. Its tale is how Vito Corleone in-
exorably becomes a Don. Ragtime expresses its outrage about immigrant
struggle and child abuse in a controlled tone that never wavers or lets
the reader be comfortable. The voice is that of harsh irony undercutting
every self-aggrandizing or Promethean plan of its characters. Vito Corleone
will succeed because it is his destiny to do so. Ragtime’s male strivers,
from Father to Tateh and Coalhouse Walker will find themselves in places
they do not choose to go, in roles foreign to them.
      The cost of Puzo’s singlevoicedness in writing the Don’s success is
a linearity that never swerves and that we can identify as a popular
literature structural principle. Doctorow’s commitment to a constant
thwarting of the yearning and intention of his characters provides a cir-
cuit of “dissatisfaction” that calls sharply to attention the chronotopes of
space/time coincidence on which all fiction thrives but does not usually
flaunt. Through statements such as “at that exact moment” and “as it
happened,” Doctorow always seeks to keep the reader moving on many
levels or “tracks.” Puzo never allows contemplation of a Corleone action
or decision to become the narrative center of The Godfather. The Corleones
must, like sharks, keep moving through the plot or die. Doctorow writes
through and of the melodramatic form from the vantage point of
postmodern parody, irony, and understatement. Nonetheless, he com-
presses imagery to categorically state his anger. When he describes the
immigrants at Ellis Island being herded and bullied by officials, he can
write that “such power was dazzling. The immigrants were reminded of
home” (15). Without going into any detail with a prior history or an
individualizing of anyone involved, Doctorow references an ideology, a
historical comparison, an ironic construction, a rueful glimpse of power-
lessness. The image is absolutely full at the same time it’s abstract and
generalized. The image succeeds in being the trace of melodrama, of po-
tentially hundreds of pages that could describe both the country of origin
and the New World replication of oppression and want; the reader clearly
recognizes that the author has positioned himself as caring but cool.
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                      213



       Neither the popular fiction melodrama of the Corleone family his-
tory in America nor the ironic treatment of the immigrant experience in
Ragtime provides anything like what multiethnic criticism has identified
as the ethnic novel or fictionalized ethnic autobiography. Puzo simplifies
and passes over the facts of the immigrant experience to get to crime and
power, family style. Having provided readers with a full fictional field of
Italian immigrant life in New York City in The Fortunate Pilgrim, he ap-
parently saw no reason to favor readers with such detail in The Godfather,
which is built on different fictional premises. Doctorow ultimately pre-
sents “immigration” in a chain of references that stretches from the par-
ticular to the universal, from intense imagery of slum conditions to
metaphors that control the novel. The Godfather may sound rich and
multiform because of its large cast and adventures in many locales, but
it’s really one long tale of male power and secretiveness with no consis-
tent authorial voice beyond the family commenting or controlling the
issues raised. We cannot imagine any other contexts than what we see for
the Corleones or their enemies. We cannot see them exploring new lives,
acquiring new skills, or showing a curiosity about a world outside the
family. They exemplify the fallacy of total control in their essential wood-
enness. Interested in nothing but the family, they are uninteresting them-
selves beyond their instrumental frame. While Ragtime sounds the same
on every page in a declarative monotone, its verbal resources, wit, and
grasp of American and media history are prodigious. Its characters are
all restless, “dissatisfied,” imaginatively licensed to metamorphose into
other Americans, to pursue other selves. Immigration in Ragtime becomes
not a fixed one-time action (Sicily to America in The Godfather) but a
constant human changing that extends from fathers through all the char-
acters in Ragtime.


                 Fathers and Immigrants:
               Power, Escape, Dissatisfaction

      Fathers in both The Godfather and Ragtime are the true centers of
power, but they function in very different ways, emblematic of the dif-
ferent intents of popular and elite fiction. Puzo writes of the unbroken
succession of authority that passes from Vito to Michael Corleone, a suc-
cession that occurs without visible oedipal trauma and with victory for
the family over all its enemies. Doctorow systematically shatters the
authority that his unnamed “Father” possesses on the first page of Rag-
time. Every major plot initiative runs through Father and his family, bring-
ing the news of a much more heterogeneous America, one comprised of
social unrest, immigrant longing, racial prejudice, and the changing roles
of women. In Ragtime, Father is more and more bewildered as a failing
representative of American exceptionalism. With Father’s world changing
214                              Chapter 7



all about him, Doctorow writes, “Father had always felt secretly that as
a family they were touched by an extra light. He felt it going now. He felt
stupid and plodding, available simply to have done to him what circum-
stances would do” (189). No longer at the center of his own errand or
America’s, Father’s rhetoric is very close to that of a helpless immigrant.
Destiny has fled Father personally; he is now done to by events, and he
cannot evolve quickly enough.
       In Ragtime, Father takes the hits; in The Godfather, Vito Corleone
orders the hits. Puzo does not question the “extra light”; Vito Corleone is
exceptional in his survival, restraint, and vision, secured through a per-
sonal force he consolidates. Father in Ragtime builds his “house on a hill”
in New Rochelle, New York, in 1902,; Vito Andolini arrives at Ellis Island
in 1901 (film version) and accepts the change of his name to “Corleone,”
the name of his town in Sicily: “[I]t was one of the few gestures of
sentiment he was ever to make” (194).1 He succeeds in re-creating himself
as a Sicilian within America, taking the Old World town into himself
along with its suspicions and feuds. He remains static and unchanged in
America. Doctorow, however, writes of Father that he was, even in death,
“the immigrant, as in every moment of his life, arriving eternally on the
shore of his Self” (269), a maxim Doctorow extends to an organic vision
of human life in a later essay when he writes, “Everyone all the time is
in the act of composition, our experience is an ongoing narrative within
each of us” and “[P]eople find the meaning of their lives in sequence”
(Essays 114–15). Characteristic of Doctorow and elite fiction is the major
trope making that elevates a plot line and a character trait to both a
metaphysical and a metanarrative principle. “Immigration” in Ragtime is
always metamorphosing into escape, growth, and the most simple and
awful temporality. Such internal intellectual energy within a concept
derived from metaphor is what drives elite fiction’s production and the
critical attempt to realize its multiple meanings. In a novel such as The
Godfather, immigration is not suggestive in its meanings but reductive.
The concept is retained but with all its potential richness (immigration as
family melodrama, customs, language, food, mores, religion, vocation)
placed in skeletal forms. In a sense Puzo borrows against this ethnic
richness but provides only the silhouette of it, the snapshot, precisely
what Ragtime is in the process of analyzing. Elite fiction raises a trope to
a metaphor. Popular fiction reduces a trope to its semantic outlines and
then trades on the aura of its richness, its authentic life. What fast food
does to “taste,” what Disney does to nature and animals, what television
does to “middle-class experience,” Puzo does to ethnicity and the immi-
grant in The Godfather.
       The status of immigrant puts the father under great stress. Patri-
archs thrive most under stable systems of long duration when tradition,
order, and custom rule work and days. Also, the logic of immigration
itself is toward transformation; the death of the immigrant is the assimi-
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                      215



lation into the new land. Immigrants must die away in the American
narrative. They are a species whose “destiny” is to adapt or die, but, as
Doctorow knows, that adaptation to or absorption by the new land is
never a fixed state, an endless composing and recomposing of self and
one not limited to people from foreign shores but to all of humanity. The
immigrant of 1900 is a prisoner of sorts within the city of different lan-
guage, customs, and culture, confined to economic servitude and a vic-
tim of prejudice. For Doctorow, such states prompt outrage rendered in
irony and paradox: children as “happy elves” worked to exhaustion by
factory bosses, immigrants who waited for their lives to change after
Jacob Riis took their pictures (15, 34). For Puzo, the immigrant plight and
its powerlessness replicates the Old World oppression and is the justifi-
cation for “going bad,” for not accepting oppression and not waiting for
change. Furthermore, in The Godfather, immigrant fathers and their sons
stand together against their enemies in common enterprise in a straight-
forward and most uncomplicated binding, rewriting Freud and Darwin
in their solidarity without angst, resentment, or decline. Corleone family
business does not go deeply into neurosis or evolution.
      The immigrant in twentieth-century America is the modern meta-
morphosed vanishing American, falling away in a symbolic genocide
that is destined to occur in the very temporality of the plot within which
the immigrant is inscribed. In organic terms, the immigrant is always
doomed to disappear and to be lost to history, either in poverty or dis-
ease or in an American rebirth. With that rebirth, the new American’s
history truly begins, always at the cost of a prior self. Ragtime’s central
figures all go through this American process, even Father and his family,
for Doctorow finds no one exempt from change at any time. In contrast,
The Godfather posits a total denial of the need to change, as if it were a
choice renounced. Puzo’s Sicilian immigrants enact that American immi-
grant fantasy, one buried deep within the experience of millions of
Americans arriving here in the early twentieth century. Within the
Corleone compound and organization, the immigrant is never in an es-
tranged role. The Corleones resist adaptation and never admit to dissatis-
faction. Their hard fact of purchase in American society is “killing a man,”
which authenticates their “reason,” but which does not partake of any
American structure of law, business, government, or culture. They do not
sow or reap; they do not make or replicate. They desire to be no one other
than themselves. In many ways, the Corleones are as terrifying and inexo-
rable as Faulkner’s Snopes clan in their intervention in American capital-
ism, the urban plague to match the rural one, omnipotent and unchallenged.
      Doctorow knows that immigration, while a human constant and
thus a “universal” currency, has its stranger analogues. Father signs on
for Peary’s expedition to the North Pole, where Peary ultimately cannot
say exactly where they are because the ice shifts endlessly. A watery
planet defeats his stern will and measure; he must simply declare himself
216                              Chapter 7



“there.” There is no place to plant the American flag, for the world is too
vast and inhospitable. Evelyn Nesbit ministers to Tateh’s Little Girl and
ultimately desires to affiliate with the immigrants in their poverty: “she
was insane with the desire to become one of them . . . for a few hours
each day she lived as a woman in the Jewish slums” (43), before Thaw’s
chauffeur comes to pick her up and drive her back to the mansion. Evelyn
casts herself in a movie role before Tateh even helps invent the medium.
She is “having an experience” as a living sentimental character in rela-
tion to an external object on which she lavishes her feelings, yet it is only
a shift of her desiring imagination from herself, from sensation to sym-
pathy. In succeeding decades, future Evelyn Nesbits might “take a role”
in a such a sentimentally serious “breakthrough film” to enhance a ca-
reer. Doctorow frames the scene showing Evelyn “so desperately in love
that she could no longer see properly” but rather seeing “everything
through a film of salt tears” (43). Her tear-filled eye becomes the camera,
a living medium of emotional representation. This metafictional critique
of sentimentalism, while representing the scene through it, is Doctorow’s
double reference and postmodernism’s great ploy: to allow us to know
as we read the manipulation of the very responses that make up our
reading. Doctorow takes the risk of the elite author that the reader will
not lose primary allegiance to the character while sharing an insight both
at the character’s expense and the reader’s own naive emotion. Such an
emotional balancing act is everywhere in postmodern reader response,
and no author describes its workings better than Doctorow. Evelyn is an
aimless “immigrant,” wandering with her body through women’s roles
and costume changes as mistress, sex object, and nurturer. Finally bored
with both the slums that are closed to her and with Younger Brother’s
neurotic attentions, she wants back in her most comfortable popular genre:
“she wanted someone who would treat her badly and whom she could
treat badly’ (74).
       Such a multileveled investigation of Evelyn’s meanings as popular
heroine within genre is beyond Puzo’s goals and reach. He wants to use
Kay Adams Corleone as a moral touchstone and also as a site of America
ultimately absorbed into the family. An Adams daughter from New
England finally gets the truth about her murderous husband, at which
point, she goes back into the kitchen and weeps. In what amounts to The
Godfather’s epilogue, Puzo gives Kay the novel’s last perceptions. Having
converted to Catholicism after internalizing the enormity of Michael’s
sins, she attends daily mass and takes communion Puzo shows her
emptying “her mind of all thought of herself, of her children, of all anger,
of all rebellion, of all questions. Then with a profound and deeply-willed
desire to be heard, as she had every day since the murder of Carlo Rizzi,
she said the necessary prayers for the soul of Michael Corleone” (446).
Puzo never writes in self-reflexive commentary about the very forms
within which he works, but often he wants the reader to make compari-
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                      217



sons with other scenes and large motions in the novel. Here, what Puzo
has called “casual irony” operates for any and all readers. Kay has been
Michael’s most insistent interrogator from the large American society
about “what if everyone . . .” She is his wife whom he has not trusted.
She has learned from becoming a Corleone how to put herself in the
hands of a higher authority. Yet she does so to save Michael, not be
dominated by him. Kay’s supplications are in line with the favors asked
of the Don on his daughter’s wedding day. Now he is gone, and she
needs to appeal to a different God.
       Another author might weave a feminist argument through “pro-
found and deeply willed desire . . . to be heard” as indicting the silencing
of women or an ironic religious comment about a final reinstallation of
God as the true arbiter of human wishes, but Puzo is not that author.
There’s no pattern for such a reading to take shape in the language or
images. More than likely, Kay’s abjection and conversion are in line with
an unasked question: how powerful is Michael, son of Don Vito? So
powerful that his wife must become Catholic, must pray like his Sicilian
mother for his redemption. Just so does Kay go back into the kitchen to
weep, because that’s what women do, at least Puzo’s women. That kitchen
is a real kitchen, not a symbolic space. It’s a woman’s place because that’s
where Corleone women can be found, and the parlor is occupied with
mobsters—nothing more.
       Evelyn Nesbit’s attempt to become a woman of the slums exists in
her sympathy, which Doctorow wants to deconstruct. Her “arriving” on
the “shores” of a new self is provisional and mediated by popular re-
sponses. The reader is always held back from primary identification with
Evelyn. When she first makes her way to Little Girl, who is tied by a rope
to Tateh so she won’t be abducted, “she knelt down, her eyes dewy, and
looked into the face of the dry-eyed girl. Hey pumpkin she said” (38).
Evelyn’s “Hey pumpkin” is incongruous, colloquial, nonethnic, and na-
ive; it is sympathy at its most bland as Doctorow turns the scene from
pathos to bathos while not losing it for the reader. Evelyn is banal and
familiar; the “dry-eyed girl” is not moved by her own plight nor by
Evelyn’s attention. In her final scene in The Godfather, Kay Adams Corleone
is the object lesson. Her role is to express Corleone power, not to call
attention to her contingent status through gender or genre. Evelyn, no
less an innocent character caught up in response to suffering, is the text
herself for Doctorow—her maternal concern in her acting through a salty
camera eye. Doctorow concludes, “[H]er voice became husky because
her throat was bathed in the irrepressible and continuous crying which
her happiness caused her” (43), linking the two indispensable facets of
sentiment (crying and its happiness) but also grimly recalling Evelyn’s
salty throat when Thaw demands her to perform fellatio on him in the
Tombs; she is tied to him by need of money no less than Little Girl is
roped to Tateh. The last image of Evelyn’s tears tells the truth that when
218                                Chapter 7



Evelyn cries for Little Girl, she cries for herself, which, as a true narcissist
in brief remission, is fitting for her as a melodramatic heroine.
      When Emma Goldman writes to Evelyn that she’s using her as an
example in ideological critique, “Evelyn didn’t know what to do with
such remarks” (71). She is a mystified popular reader, not knowing what
she exemplifies. As a character fueling the culture’s dreams of sexuality,
she has no dreams not made by that culture nor any vantage point from
which to see herself not claimed by her self. Puzo in The Godfather never
introduces any character from whom a critique may be offered, excepting
Jack Woltz and Kay Adams, the one silenced by violence, and the other,
by marriage vows. There’s no privileged information not vouchsafed to
the Corleones themselves or parsed out by them. Their world view is the
novel’s limit and the reader must live coextensive with them. Self-reflection
would destroy the purity of their heroism and release the monolithic
control they have. It would simply be weakness. When Doctorow speaks
of Grandfather’s fascination with Ovid and transformation, he writes
that “forms of life were volatile and that everything in the world could
as easily be something else” (97). Ragtime unfolds within this fluidity, as
does America. Bakhtin’s concept of ‘heteroglossia’, the primal sea of lan-
guage acitvity that washes over all discourse, no matter how worked up
or styilized, is ideologically very democratic in its ethos, touching all
parts of discourse and all speakers. Puzo by restricting his novel’s infor-
mation and scrutiny refuses to let his characters join in this life. Popular
fiction always censors such multiform richness.


                      Arriving at “Our Gang”

      Much has already been said in chapters 3 and 6 about Puzo’s use
of destiny to describe Don Corleone’s passage through The Godfather. The
family passes under the sign of fate that is Puzo’s ticket for them to ride
out any crisis that threatens their authority. Bakhtin well depicts this
narrative world as that of the epic (see also chapter 8), one that he calls
the “world of fathers and founder of families,” a world in which the hero
is absolutely equal to himself and has already become everything he
could become. Epic characters for Bakhtin are bounded, preformed, and
individualized by various destinies (The Dialogic Imagination 13, 34). He
notes that an epic past is preserved and revealed only in the form of a
national tradition, which is given as sacred and sacrosanct (16). In The
Godfather, the national tradition is merged with the family as sacred and
political entity to form Cosa Nostra. “Our World” is defined by the bound-
aries of the Corleone family, and all actions taken and decisions made are
within that world. The family becomes the nation, and “Our World”
becomes “ourselves.” Such equating serves the popular fiction plot well
when readers want and expect strong actions and emotions on behalf of
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                       219



clear goals by consistent characters. In effect, everything in popular fic-
tion is punctuated, every syllable expressed, and all relations ultimately
stand in the light.
      Elite fiction is wary of the epic’s opaqueness and wants to break
into its monolithic narrative and sonorous surface. In Ragtime, Doctorow
clearly wishes to speak of what is momentous in the American experi-
ence. He has a passionate feel for the epic sweep of our history, but in an
oxymoronic gesture, he strips the patriarchs of their authority and the
American exceptionalism of its clarity and assurance. Instead he exposes
the brawling and contesting set of forces behind the American epic/
errand, in which no character or set of ideals can ever be co-extensive
with the nation or with self. Fisher has commented that the struggle of
any historical novel takes on the appearance of destiny in the reader’s
own time (115) because the reader is inevitably living in a world that
must accept certain outcomes. What Doctorow does is work forward
toward the fact of Hollywood’s rewriting of the immigrant struggle into
the Our Gang vision of neighborhood kids, an image that stands for
suppression of history’s hard facts in the lives of the characters who have
contributed to Tateh’s vision on the lawn in Beverly Hills. To amend
Fisher on Cooper’s conclusions to the Leatherstocking novels, in Ragtime,
“on the way to [the lawn in Beverly Hills], “there was a massacre . . . there
was a massacre . . . there was a massacre” (Fisher 73).
      Moreover, Doctorow drives the reader of Ragtime back from the
reader’s present in America to the birth of the replication and image
culture that created the Our Gang image in the first place. Destiny is
contested by such invention and innovation, which is not epic but insur-
gent, even if on behalf of a material ethos. The novel’s double historical
frame moves forward from 1900 to roughly 1920 in the novel’s pages,
while its conclusion in Hollywood puts the half-century between 1920
and the novel’s publishing (1975) in firm perspective. Both the form of
the American historical novel and its function in the present are served
and satisfied by Doctorow’s narrative. When Father begins to lose the
“extra light” that had touched the family, it’s American Exceptionalism
waning in its surety. Doctorow places the light in aesthetic terms when
he writes of Winslow Homer’s painting: when “a certain light was still
available along the eastern seaboard. Homer painted that light” (4). The
“eastern seaboard” references American vision from the Puritans through
the Founders to the Transcendentalists, finally come to reside in the flick-
ering light of the early movie projector on the “western seaboard” as the
families in Ragtime pass through its transforming lens into “Our Story”
of who we are as a modern nation.
      Ragtime’s last image of the novel’s children about to be converted
into Our Gang cuts away the individualized suffering of immigration
and of family struggle as we know it. Tateh is a survivor and a booster,
as well as a tycoon. He has performed the makeover of social motion,
220                             Chapter 7



death, and desperation into powerful popular art, and he has not been
cynical. Recall Michael Corleone’s bland view of becoming legitimate
and joining “some country club crowd, the good simple life of well-to-
do Americans” (363), what Puzo also describes as “that general destiny”
(365). Tateh’s view is Michael’s, which is in actuality an Our Gang of
country club adults. Neither Tateh or Michael is reflective or counts the
cost. Doctorow, however, drives the Our Gang image to devastating
implications, whereas Puzo simply references the stolid, monlithic “good”
American life as out there for the Corleones to join when they’re ready.
What Puzo takes for granted, the American world that Cosa Nostra cites
when convenient, becomes the controlling image for Doctorow’s conclu-
sion about how popular narrative is produced. The stunned reader asks
of Ragtime, is that what Coalhouse’s struggle and martyrdom were for?
Sara’s lingering death after being assaulted by the vice presidential body-
guards? Father’s mystification and death on the Lusitania? Tateh’s wife
banished by him after her defilement on the cutting room floor? In Rag-
time, the reader has seen every step to the lawn in Beverly Hills and
weighs the sanitized outcome. The melodrama is expunged in favor of
children “getting into trouble and getting out again” (270). In The
Godfather’s final pages, the reader may also pray with Kay and over
Michael’s massacre in the name of his father and the Family. However,
the terrible Corleone power holds sway over her silent entreaties, and
the melodrama is complete with no lessons beyond the family plot.
      However the two novels arrive at the last image of Our Gang in
their disparate meanings, each posits a history without tears, Puzo by
showing us the family we’ve come to know and love as triumphant,
Doctorow, by Tateh’s sentimental rewriting and collapsing of families’
struggles. If we believe Michael to be a hypocrite or a liar about “the
country club” or the general American destiny, we must as readers pro-
vide the image with a concept, a richness of association that Puzo never
provides. What The Godfather lacks is any tension generated by the lan-
guage outside the plot itself, any referential or dislocating trope that
would take the Corleones into a hybridized relation set against a power
equal to their own or at least contestatory to it. The Godfather ends with
the consolidation of Michael’s power. He has become his father, order is
restored, and the family is impregnable. We are where we were at the
beginning of the novel, even with all the deaths tallied. In Ragtime, the
reader experiences a great shock in Our Gang as it becomes a mythical
signifier in a tremendous rush of insight; the reader feels what the entire
novel has been “meaning toward.” No such sublimity is possible in Puzo’s
text, where each moment is equivalent to itself and no other. In Ragtime,
the families have been dissolved and reconstituted, and the stories of
that pain and striving are rewritten by the “father” who has first
reconsituted himself. The Our Gang story will be popular because it will
be free of the violence of the prehistory that conditioned it. We are not
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                       221



back at the beginning of Ragtime but at the beginning of our own modern
era of media culture in cinema’s new way of telling that culture its truth—
what will become the catch-phrase of Disney-fication. The actual surviv-
ing family in Ragtime is made up of children, a widow, and a widower,
yet it includes an orphan of color, a little boy and a little girl whose
parents have been lost to history. The widow and widower are an ex-
socialite and an ex-socialist; the murder, madness, racism, rage, and
despair are gone. What remains is a sentimental view of childhood that
remembers a past that never existed for these children but will exist in
a media future, where we all get along.
      Ragtime works to describe how Our Gang came to be, an image that
only crystallizes on the last page and allows the reader to speculate
about the power of a popular image, what Puzo never does through such
notable protagonists as Vito and Michael Corleone, who are solely heroes
in a tale of vanquishing enemies. Tateh is more problematic for readers,
the inscrutable survivor of Doctorow’s converging plot-lines, the grim
and oppressed socialist immigrant who becomes optimistic American
image maker. He becomes the historian America wants to “read” through
his comedies, which began as silhouettes and outlines that suggested
emotion. Any freedom that he now possesses in Hollywood to produce
his visions comes after the jettisoning of his ideals, his wife, his name,
and his past. Yet Doctorow doesn’t judge him. Tateh has found a way to
tap into the main line of American energy. He has given the culture what
it wants; he reads his audience. He has become a benign Jack Woltz in
a tale free of a Vito Corleone to plague him with comparisons of remain-
ing “authentic.”
      Linda Hutcheon writes of the “inscribing into history” in the 1960s
of previously silenced groups in literature, who are defined by the differ-
ences of “race, gender, sexual preferences, ethnicity, native status, and
class.” From the 1970s through the ‘90s, such “ex-centric” groups have
been rapidly and completely inscribed into andro/phallo/hetero/Euro/
ethno centrisms (61). In effect, Ragtime writes the prehistory of this recent
social motion and literary absorption of the margin into the new hybrid-
ized center but completely within the novel’s early-twentieth-century
frame, making the point that any historical novel is about both its created
era and the time of its own creation. Ragtime’s three major families are
dispersed and reconstructed into multiples of new social demographics.
The revolutionaries, artists, and women are silenced by the new culture
industry of which Tateh is a godfather. America knows which stories it
wants to hear, and it chooses Our Gang on Tateh’s lawn and Our Gang
in the Mafia. America truly does not care if the Corleones assimilate or
not as long as they thrill us in their family violence, and America does
not care who or what disappeared into the melting pot as long as Tateh’s
kids are cute. What fades away in postmodern historicism for Hutcheon
is any sure ground upon which to base representation and narration (89).
222                              Chapter 7



Thus we come to Our Gang, which finally denies in Ragtime what the
third page of the novel had so rudely announced: “Apparently there were
Negroes. There were immigrants” (5).


      Popular and Elite Fiction: Aims and Practices

      The Godfather denies multiple subjects all the time in its representa-
tion, but Puzo never makes the reader aware he knows that. The elite
novel consistently calls attention to the problems involved in its own
making and reception. To find these problems in a popular novel is often
to deal with the issues that are not foregrounded and then do much of
the work in framing them. In essence, Puzo is free to write of a turn-of-
the-century immigrant hero without ever taking the reader down into
the ghettoes of the Lower East and West Sides of New York City to show
poverty, disease, and despair because someone like the fictional Tateh
had shown how to create the narrative melodrama that outlined and
silhouetted characters without cause and effect, without the myriad iro-
nies and historical reversals making up the large social march called
“immigration.” How fresh and unassimilated Tateh appears, a character
like no one and nobody, yet largely unknown to us, even at novel’s end.
What, finally, would his story be, if narrated by himself? For such hon-
esty, a reader might turn to the classic fictionalized autobiography of the
immigrant era, The Rise of David Levinsky (1917) by Abraham Cahan, or
to Doctorow’s Billy Bathgate (1989).2 Both The Godfather and Ragtime are
past such mimetic reflection for different reasons. Puzo certainly doesn’t
risk his Corleone family being dragged down into power relations in an
equal and mystifying field of desire Doctorow can’t let his characters live
individually beyond his orchestrated ensemble, so committed is he to
history’s power and the contortions of desire and dissatisfaction. Puzo
won’t create a dialogized world, while Doctorow won’t let his characters
alone. Neither author trusts the power of realism to bring issues fully
into focus. Puzo fears losing his authority. Doctorow, too, would lose
authority if he were to naively acknowledge the power of the “every-
thing said” that he admires in Dreiser. He would lose the intensely worked
up narration of Ragtime, as complete a center of control as is Corleone
parlay of reason and fear as mounted by Puzo. What Puzo imposes in
the popular novel as the dominance of characters in his gang to control
the plot, Doctorow in the elite novel imposes on the narrative voice and
the interrelation of the American ensemble that finally allows the reader
to see that the whole sweep of Ragtime before its final page. Here is the
true tale of our diversity and metamorphosis, one that also belies Tateh’s
last reductive image.
      Ragtime’s truest “gang” is found on the skater’s pond at the foot of
the Paine Avenue hill within the criss-crossed skaters’ tracks where Little
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                     223



Boy, Doctorow’s historical consciousness, sees the mystery and power of
history and fiction welling up from a popular visual image of commu-
nity and civility, one that glosses and displaces the other incomplete
“tracks” images throughout Ragtime. Such is the novelist’s grid of mul-
tiple perspectives and personalities that always contains more fluid and
more suggestive plot lines than the rigid positing of destiny. This rewrit-
ing and morphing of the deeply American symbol of the railroad, an epic
monster in Norris’s Octopus, within the classic Currier and Ives village
print domesticates its power and brings it back toward family and col-
lective. On the metanarrative level, the skater’s pond “map” is Ragtime’s
rhetorical template of erasures and coincidences in all the characters’
lives, which cuts away at their individualism and free will in vintage
elite fictional fashion. Elite fiction often predicates its power on its
multileveled meanings and deep structures, but at the core of its narra-
tive complexity is often the simplest and most inclusive of images (the
skaters’ tracks) and the most daring commitment to potential human
freedom and diversity, while often showing its impossibility on the level
of the fiction itself. Popular fiction, which usually purports to be “popu-
list” at its core, deals with issues of its lead characters’ oppression and
drive toward authority and/or freedom, but it is finally elitist in its re-
fusal to ever grant its characters pure possibility or openendedness. The
fiction for the common reader is author-itarian, and Don Corleone is the
perfect exemplar.
      Popular fiction fears the power of the quotidian with which realism
would challenge melodrama. Elite fiction must complicate the quotidian
to prove that the individual’s mind and sensibility are the most privi-
leged centers of truth that outstrip anything the material world can ren-
der. Doctorow remains committed to both the hard fact of the material
culture’s obstinate presence and the mandarin view of individual au-
tonomy and subjectivity that chronicles but never masters it. How he
reconciles his social outrage at American inequalities in an elegant and
highly aestheticized narration dictates his creative tension in novel after
novel. Puzo has no consistent inventive style, no master trope or organiz-
ing principle beyond telling the story. Rather, he draws on the power of
traditional “moments” (weddings, funerals, beginnings, and endings) as
reference. A good example of reader association that Puzo probably hoped
the reader would grasp is the fact that The Godfather begins and ends in
the Corleone compound on Long Island, juxtaposing the marriage of
Connie and Carlo Rizzi with Connie’s final accusation that Michael has
killed Carlo, that he would never have done it if their father had been
alive. The interlocking scenes of marriage, wedding day favors, the death
of the husband, the sister coming not to ask for a favor but to label her
brother a killer, Kay then asking Michael if it’s true, Michael “using all
the mutual trust they had built up in their marriage” (437) to lie to her—
all the correspondences fit and round off the family plot. Yet they call
224                               Chapter 7



attention to nothing outside the plot itself. They make the serial unfold-
ing of Corleone power symmetrical and satisfy a low-level readerly need
for “similarity,” whereas Ragtime’s beginning and ending take the idea of
a house and a family into ironic reversals as well as recomposition. Father’s
“house on a hill,” part of the earliest imagery of American compacts from
John Winthrop onward and suggestive in the domesticated emblem of
the prosperous American state, is transported to Beverly Hills, with the
reconstituted family on the lawn in California, the image in the mind of
Tateh, the producer. He will “make” this child-dominated family group
into an image that America wants to believe about itself, having adven-
tures “in their own neighborhood” (270), a place that is now everywhere
and nowhere through the power of film and that effaces the deaths that
allowed them to arrive there. Tateh as film producer would immediately
understand the narrative drive of The Godfather.
      Ragtime asks the reader to consider the consequences and erasures
of popular narrative manipulation, whereas The Godfather’s resonances
happen only on the plane of the novel itself. The Godfather more simply
records Michael manipulating Kay and then has Tom Hagen justify
Michael’s action for her. Ragtime consistently moves to a metacritical
examination of the processes by which the American popular culture
authorizes itself in forgetting American history. The Godfather records the
inexorable Corleone victories with only Kay’s dedicated prayers, an es-
sentially futile gesture, as comment. Puzo looks to neither the popular
culture, the larger American history, nor the agonies and promises of
immigration. So much is cut away that, in effect, the Corleones are the
real silhouettes, instrumentalized into action on behalf of the family, as
machinelike as anything a material Ragtime culture could conjure up in
the age of Ford. No public life is evident in The Godfather, whereas Rag-
time is a Bakhtinian carnivalized text. Ragtime’s power is in its intellectual
and ideological energy, exhibited by restless evolving characters such as
Houdini and deployed through brilliant deadpan language conceits. Puzo
reserves the novel’s power for the Corleone victory in the plot, whereas
characters in Ragtime do not “win.”
      Doctorow in a 1985 essay, “The Belief of Writers,” lays out his fic-
tional ethic:

      The young writer who picks up tonally, philosophically on the
      Hemingway romance, is in danger of misperceiving the pre-
      dominant condition of things, which is that the future of any
      of us is not individual. As independent entrepeneurs of our-
      selves with no control over our destiny, we may be failing the
      task. How will we be able to stay true to the changing nature
      of our lives if we hold to a myth that is being nullified by
      history? If our response to what is going on today were appro-
      priate, it would probably produce books . . . with less polish
                       The Corleones as “Our Gang”                      225



     and self-consciousness, but about the way power works in our
     society, who has it, and how it is making history. (117)

      Within Doctorow’s dismissal of the individual at the center of fic-
tion in our time is a fundamental renunciation of popular’s fiction im-
perative to rely on the aggrandizing power of a Corleone or a Corleone
family. “Destiny” is always beyond the control of our “changing selves”
and is “nullified by history.” Doctorow wants to show how power works,
and that includes narrative power. Within that charge, he must work
from the “myth” of individual power itself. He must show the fruitless
quests of, for example, J. P. Morgan to transcend himself at the top of a
gross materialist pyramid of money and power to seek more irrational
secrets of his spiritual nature, to watch Houdini, the immigrant genius,
replicate that metaphysical escape on the level of the physical, night after
night for American audiences, as he uses up his body and its resources
in seeking the riddle of death. Younger Brother sublimates his gusts of
romantic passion into the radical who knows how to blow things up.
Coalhouse Walker grieves and then demands his redress from America,
which slaughters him in his excess of pride and then violence. Mother
and Tateh learn to evolve in the new century as versatile new woman
and American image maker. America itself is reinvented as the Franklin
Novelty Company, the name of Tateh’s first employer in—where else?—
Ben’s Philadelphia. Doctorow might, indeed, call for someone like a more
morally aware Puzo, who could produce books “with less polish and
self-consciousness,” but, unfortunately, having passed that part of
Doctorow’s test, the Corleones exemplify power in society but fail to
make any point about how it is distributed or whom it harms or what its
relation to a larger American history might be; they remain mythic and
do not believe in history.
      Doctorow has a great admiration for the inventions of the male
titans of American fiction in 1900, such as Dreiser and London, exem-
plars of “less polish and self-consciousness.” Dreiser in Ragtime is the
“morose novelist” seeking “the proper alignment” in his rented room in
Brooklyn by doggedly moving his chair in a complete circle, hoping to
break into the main lines of the culture’s force and energy. Of Dreiser’s
Sister Carrie, Doctorow writes that the feelings of the major characters
“brilliantly exceed . . . the magnitude of their minds or the originality of
their problems” (“Theodore Dreiser: Book One” 31), a fine description of
Carrie, Drouet, and Hurstwood, as well as Ragtime’s major players, and
finally a key source of all sentimental and melodramatic fictional power.
Who will care about, for example, Michael or Vito Corleone’s logic or
consistency of argument as long as they may identify with the universal-
ity of their family problems? Doctorow also writes with affection about
London as a writer “who went to a place and wrote his dreams into it,
the kind of writer who found an Idea and spun his psyche around it. He
226                              Chapter 7



was a workaday genius literary hack . . .” (13) No better description of a
best-seller writer, one who brings forth a mythos through the intensity of
his capture of material, can be found. Puzo himself may be strangely
ennobled by such ascription. The saga of the Corleones is an emigration
without true poverty or pathos, a rise to power without friction with the
larger culture by a male family without affect but with great coherence
and solidarity. The Corleones are a sombre clan, which embodies Puzo’s
“spun” psyche, his need for a powerful father, his early flight from
ethnicity, his justification of going bad as an author, his ultimate transpo-
sition of ethnicity into conservative family virtue, his selling of violence
and murder in the name of sentiment and reason. Not only did Puzo
write his dreams into the Corleones, but he wrote the Corleones into
American dreams, where they embody those dreams.
      In writing of London’s Call of the Wild, Doctorow is fascinated by
the great dog Buck, his affiliation with mankind until his master is killed,
and then his decision to run with the wolf pack, all ties cut with human-
kind. Here is the primal going bad saga, the going outside not only the
law but also civilization and humankind as Buck had known them.
Doctorow sees very clearly that such is London’s parable of prehistory,
the reversion to an earlier being not caught in civilization’s narrative
about itself. Buck may be a dog, and Vito Corleone a Don, but the par-
allels are clear. Doctorow writes that Call speaks to “what is momen-
tous,” and that the novel asks not what is Buck’s survival but “what is
his philosophical destiny?” Such is the question all the characters mutely
ask by implication in their actions in Ragtime; such is the question that
Puzo hammers at in the repeated mentions of destiny in The Godfather.
Buck takes revenge after John Thornton’s death and moves off with the
pack. Michael is lost to the larger America when he rejoins the family to
stand by his father in what Doctorow, writing about Call, labels “the
dream life of our atavistic selves” (17), in which London wrote a “mor-
dant parable,” “a parody of sentimental education wherein the hero is
de-civilized” (18). Such is Michael Corleone’s reversion as well, but it’s
into the family itself, the substitute for the nation he has joined and then
renounced. Michael in effect is now “where life triumphant belongs to
the most fit” (Doctorow 18). The Corleone ascendancy minus the claus-
trophobic allegiances that the family fosters in the reader is one more
desensitizing challenge to our moral natures. As Doctorow concludes
about London’s Call, “This is not a sweet idea for a book, it is rather the
kind of concept to justify tyrannies and the need of repressive social
institutions to keep people from tearing themselves to bits. But London’s
Nietzschean superdog has our admiration if the truth be told” (18).
      Within the curve of this thought, Doctorow exactly catches the larg-
est of contradictory frames in which The Godfather lives in our dreams.
Doctorow suggests a bit of Woltz’s reaction to the Corleones in his un-
easiness about Call, in his fear that there couldn’t be a world if we all
                      The Corleones as “Our Gang”                     227



were to be like Buck; but within that fear, a larger sentiment carries his
emotional sway over to Buck as one who can cut it, who breaks through
all hesitancies and restraints to act as the dominant male. That’s finally
what audiences want most from The Godfather, not the moral riders to its
constitution (Corleones indivisible with dominance over all, all checks
and balances held by them, all three branches of government—and
executioneer). Doctorow knows that Call “never forgets its sources as a
magazine frontier romance” (19) any more than Puzo ever forgets The
Godfather is a melodrama of broad action and simple passions. Doctorow
concludes that it’s “Jack London’s hack genius that makes us cheer for
his Buck and want to lope with him in happy, savage honor back to the
wild, running and howling with the pack” (19).3
      No better description can be found to explain what The Godfather
does to us as readers who occasionally want nothing more than to go off-
duty as guardians of our own moral nature and, in this most democratic
and egalitiarian of all systems, cut through all responsibility except the
primal one, to know where our natures are and to act on them, though
beyond such simplification is the fallen world of society, history, and
other people. The Corleones are “Our Pack,” too, beyond our world and
even theirs in the implication of their freedom, which quite simply knows
no competition that can’t be defeated. Godfather readers and viewers
voluntarily surrender to join Puzo’s gang and its atavistic competence.
This page intentionally left blank.
                   chapter eight


      The American Inadvertent Epic:
          The Godfather Copied
The epic gives form to a totality of life that is rounded from within; the
novel seeks, by giving form, to uncover and construct the concealed totality
of life.
                                       —Georg Lukacs, The Theory of the Novel

Most popular literature tends to be weak on the cognitive and formal levels
so that we cannot pretend to ourselves that we relish it because it makes us
wiser, subtler, or more delicately responsive to beauty.
                                           —Leslie Fiedler, What Was Literature

He is Al DeNiro and I am Bobby Pacino. Then I’m Al and he’s Bobby.
Recently, visits from Marlon Keitel. Roles assumed daily. We move as
rapidly as we can from imitation to parody to the grotesque, the monster
versions, contortions, screaming the lines in the exhilarating ridiculosity of
our everyday lives. Throw away the movies. Do each other, go directly to the
gargoyle faces emitting gargoyle voices.
                                            —Frank Lentricchia, Johnny Critelli

Writing novels is a dead end, like being a blacksmith. It’s all movies and
TV now.
                                                         —Puzo, The Last Don

      If there is reason to contrast a best-selling novel such as The Godfa-
ther with an elite text such as Ragtime, then surely the novel should be
displayed against other best sellers of comparable scope as well. Is there
a transhistorical, genre-busting popular category that might contain Puzo’s
novel? Leslie Fiedler, long the bad boy of American literary critical para-
digm making and popular-elite fiction relations, suggested in The Inad-
vertent Epic (1979) that “works which long endure win our assent not

                                     229
230                               Chapter 8



rationally and logically, like history, philosophy, or science, but viscerally,
passionately, like rituals in primitive societies or dreams in our own.
They tend, that is to say, to reinforce our wildest paranoid delusions
along with our most utopian hopes . . .” (84).1 Fiedler as a psychoanalytic
critic of American mythography was most interested in novels “rooted in
demonic dreams of race, sex and violence which have long haunted us
Americans” (17) across our history, such as Uncle Tom’s Cabin, Gone with
the Wind, and Alex Haley’s Roots, with excursions into Thomas Dixon’s
The Clansman and D. W. Griffith’s adaptation in The Birth of a Nation.
Fiedler sees readers at these sites licensing themselves “to be driven out
of control,” to “return to psychic states which [they] have theoretically
abandoned in the name of humanity and reason” (84). The “humanity
and reason” thus overturned could comprise, for example, the larger
collective body of moral questioning about The Godfather’s view of men
and their responsibilities to society and to common law beyond the
fierce family position. Such works, then, says Fiedler, do not have to
pass the test of being able to “instruct and delight” but rather move
through us in “dreams awake” (85). He thus agrees with Doctorow’s
assessment about such compelling narratives, that they draw on our
atavistic reader’s affiliation.
       Fiedler broadly outlined his theories about a master American
mythos as early as Love and Death in the American Novel (1960) and then
spent the next two decades shifting his theses from elite to popular fic-
tion, where the libidinous energies he identified could be more overtly
exemplified. The Inadvertent Epic also charted the deep American struc-
tures of miscegenation and symbolic color lines in the familial tale in
slavery and reconstruction periods as a subject of enduring emotional
power and significance. At present, any move in American literature
study toward critiquing best sellers or identifying incest and miscegena-
tion as controlling American tropes owes much to Fiedler in Love and
Death and The Inadvertent Epic, as well as to a renewed historicism evi-
dent in the study of slave narratives and all manner of identity narrative.
The Godfather epic reworks the incest and miscegenation in more coded
terms on the level of the isolated immigrant family and its mighty fear
of assimilation. The novel and subsequent Godfather films bind the family
members within a network of personal relations while positing assimila-
tion in America as unacceptable.
       The Godfather stands for a great, heroic dream of immigration and
family, the epic modern subject so notably missing from our twentieth-
century popular classics and sense of ourselves as Americans. Further-
more, if Fiedler is right, we would want such an epic to elide all the
difficulties and contradictions of identity and its submersion and affirm
the bond of an original, patriarchal culture within the fluidity of the self-
made American life. It is the peculiar genius of The Godfather that the
novel suggests Americans can have it all, their rooted identity and their
                       The American Inadvertent Epic                     231



mobility. The core immigrant family attains unimaginable power and
indirect influence along with the wealth that only coming to America can
provide. This miracle and dream can be negotiated in a world in which
men and women stay in their assigned roles, where family authority is
revered and American success is paramount. The Godfather unites two epic
strands of American twentieth-century experience. First, it contains the
Corleones within the great migration of Italian Americans from 1890 through
1920, the pinnacle of southern European emigration to the United States
and the high point of the powerfully symbolic Ellis Island entry into this
country as represented by Vito Corleone. Then The Godfather extends its
story into the World War II generation represented by Michael Corleone,
who is sensationally emblematic in his fashion of the millions of Ameri-
cans who settled down as husbands and wives, fathers and mothers to join
that “general destiny,” as Puzo rather benignly but contemptuously called
it, to become in the 1950s the most obsessively family-ed generation in
American life since the 1850s. On a macro level, how does The Godfather
disrupt and rearrange the American love of family and self-reliance and
wrap its dream around them? How does the bourgeois epic of immigra-
tion become, by inference, the business fable of success that the culture
needed? How do its domestic and power arrangements both mirror and
challenge American post–World War II family and business life?
       Puzo and Coppola chart the melancholy murderer Michael becomes
(Godfather II) and the death of both Michael and his daughter (Godfather
III), while the epic itself becomes more compromised by exposure to
actual American life and society as it fell into fiction. However, as shown
in chapters 3 and 5, Puzo misses countless chances to dialogize his char-
acters and their roles. Outside The Godfather per se, Puzo returns to his
epic’s roots in The Sicilian (1984) and copies himself in The Last Don (1996)
and Omerta (2000). The Sicilian, however, misses tremendous opportuni-
ties to bind Michael and his Sicilian roots, while The Last Don is en-
crusted in rather inert Mafia material and an obsessive return to what are
Puzo’s true loves after 1969, tales of Hollywood and Las Vegas. This
chapter will speculate as to how Puzo’s epic itself is assimilated beyond
his own productions, in this case into texts that are both copies and
experiments in other media. The Godfather is a commodity in the image
culture and is dispersed into manageable fictions in the realm of cinema
and television. Like any constructed artifice that becomes monumental in
postmodernity, The Godfather’s cultural affect is finally preserved in the
virtual copies of itself, in versions of the Family in language, style, and
icons. The latest progeny in The Godfather’s family is the extraordinary
HBO television series The Sopranos (1999–2001), which in its first three
seasons has adapted mob narrative to the small screen by wedding a
series of turn-of-the-millennium American concerns to a more female-
centered melodrama while retaining the male power world under stress
and potential collapse (see chapter 9).
232                               Chapter 8



      In an America that has for one hundred fifty years believed in a
manifest destiny to justify our expansion, rectitude, and national energies,
The Godfather has been an epic vehicle to portray the national errand as a
business and family triumph. America is a country that has always spoken
excessively about family. In our version of a national epic, as a colony of
England, we broke away from the abusive “parent” country, only to
reinscribe ourselves through “Founding Fathers” in a most patriarchal origin
myth that nonetheless most often featured the visual iconography of a
defiled virginal Anglo or Native American girl at the time of the American
Revolution.2 We then recuperated the female victim as a fair, young coun-
try and created in the nineteenth century the most domestic, sentimental,
family-oriented literature imaginable, only to subsume it and the family in
the late-nineteenth-century industrial civilization and accumulation of capi-
tal, thus catalyzing a realist-naturalist fiction in flight from the family,
which became pejoratively “genteel” and bourgeois in the modernist exco-
riation. The American immigrant family in the early twentieth century
enters this varied and deeply coded national family affair with its own
signification and rites of passage that ultimately contributed to another
obsessively domestic period in American life, the post–World War II 1940s
and ’50s, which culminated in the revolt against family, patriarchy, and
business at the time of The Godfather’s publication in 1969. It is the particu-
lar destiny of The Godfather to enrich this centuries-old American semiosis
and historical benchmarking with its facts and fantasies and to suggest on-
going narrative models for adaptation.3


           Epic and the Fall into Popular Fiction

      When we think of powerful epics in Western literature, the list of
works contains familiar classics (The Odyssey, The Iliad, The Aeneid, The
Song of Roland, Beowulf, The Divine Comedy), as well as a few late, more
prose- or poetry-oriented modern and contemporary masterpieces: Joyce’s
Ulysses and Derek Walcott’s Omeros, to name two. Epics tell of great
heroic deeds that also are nation-building and that inaugurate a sense of
a people and culture. The style is elevated, and action itself requires
noble and brave deeds that may touch on the superhuman and feature
descents into the underworld or involve angry or benevolent gods. Epics
“keep general reflection at a distance” through a “naiveté” (Adorno 18);
self-consciousness would only compromise the hero and drag him down
into more recognizable realist dimensions. Action in the epic fills out to
be coextensive with the known world as depicted. In the long seculariza-
tion of Western literature and descent into more realistic narrative that
culminates in the novel itself, the epic has undergone a slow dismantling
into fragments, but many of its constituent features remain and can be
identified in modern criticism of the novel. Georg Lukacs has been per-
                       The American Inadvertent Epic                       233



haps the most suggestive critic of what features of the epic are mutated
to cohere in any modern view of the novel. As Lukacs puts it, “the epic
gives form to a totality of life that is rounded from within; the novel
seeks, by giving form, to uncover and construct the concealed totality of
life” (60). Within a text such as The Godfather, immediate tensions can be
determined between its residual epic material and its pressure to disclose
in the novel form. In the case of the mob, Cosa Nostra (Our Thing,
synonomous with Our World) becomes an entire society as the Five
Families know it, extended in influence, determining its boundaries, in-
cluding all family members within it, allowing no excess or variation.
Here is the imagined “totality . . . rounded from within” that can account
for all life and conduct with no voice or competing reality permitted. To
“uncover” this rigid world, the novel exists to scrutinize and contextualize
in varied ways through its full-field description of social reality, to counter
the epic proscription against such description.
       How does Lukacs then bridge the epic into the novel? He sees the
survival of the epic in the personalized tradition of the “epic individual,”
the hero of the novel, driven to an “autonomous life of interiority” when
an “unbridgeable chasm” has been created between world and conscious-
ness (66), despite bonds “linking an individual destiny to a totality”
“whose fate is crystallised in his own” (67). The modern hero in the
novel thus is tied to history, the scrolling epic of his culture; he both
determines his relation to that history and is determined by it. Lukacs
concludes that the novel is the art form of “virile maturity” in contrast
to the epic’s “normative childlikeness” (71), in which case we might cite
Achilles as a world champion sulker before the walls of Troy unless all
his conditions are met, or to Tony Soprano, who, in his aptly child-centered
Freudian therapy often becomes a wailing unhappy little boy who can
only splutter, “But you said I was the victim of poor parenting!” The
“need for reflexion” is Lukacs’s touchstone for the “deepest melancholy
of every great and genuine novel” (92), but as this study has shown, The
Godfather, and by extension other mob narrative, has resolutely refused to
consider its own moral positions and premises, in part because of the
epic’s refusal to even consider moral blindness, the province of tragedy
at the high end of dramatic and literary production and melodrama at
the low end.
       Bakhtin in The Dialogic Imagination is interested in the epic as a
sounding board and contrast to the novelistic. As opposed to Lukacs
who sees a more organic evolution out of the epic to the novel, Bakhtin
calls for a novelistic hero who would combine positive and negative
features, low as well as lofty, and the ridiculous as well as the serious
(10). This is Bakhtin’s familiar carnivalized mode. Especially in the
postmodern rendering of what The Godfather or The Sopranos means to us,
“carnivalizing” could mean a mixture of forms and functions, even a
nostalgia for the sombre or “epic” telling. Part of postmodern carnivalizing
234                                Chapter 8



is to know that you are immersed in the carnivalesque, within speech
genres that are already extant, as when characters in a dozen or more
Hollywood movies made in the 1990s cite lines from The Godfather or
when Silvio Dante, Tony Soprano’s trusted and dour capo, is asked re-
peatedly by the Soprano “family” to reprise dialogue from The Godfather
to the great amusement of the men caught precisely in “the life.” Bakhtin
uses characteristics of the epic to show exactly what the novel should
criticize. He includes “stilted heroizing,” “narrow and unlifelike poetical-
ness,” and the “pre-packaged and unchanging nature of their heroes” (10).
Much of the reader’s tension in The Godfather occurs when the reader must
grapple with the Don’s formal speeches and gestures, Old World cunning
and deliberateness, and inflexible, far-seeing sameness. Puzo never per-
mits any cracks in this edifice, creating in a wooden style that crafts the
Don much closer to an epic hero than a novelistic one but also makes him
all the more powerful and impervious to novelistic constraints.
       Bakhtin sees the novel operating in a “zone of maximal contact
with the present” (11), and in that clash with the epic’s centering on the
past comes the true oxymoronic quality of mob narrative, that it en-
shrines for the sons (Michael Corleone, Tony Soprano) a prior world that
has already been closed in by epic developments and precepts, the world
of the fathers that has handed down all the rules and codes, the world
that was formed by prior historical clashes and outcomes. In effect, the
epic is “descent culture” par excellence as Sollors might define it, through
the “blood” or pure line without any contract or “consent” that is inher-
ently assimilationist. The Godfather in epic terms is archaic in its clannish-
ness; its arguments about force; its fierce determinism and formal world
view; its inability to countenance any relativity, uncertainty, or irony; as
well as its refusal to scrutinize itself about any of these possibilities. The
grand scale epic traces surviving into The Godfather as text enable it to
hold its power, literally within the tale and figuratively with the audi-
ence, against all enemies—other “families,” moral critics, elite readers,
censors of its Italian American “defamation”—who would qualify or
counter its strong effect.
       Popular fiction itself could be called a fiction of epic inflation, which
contains no commoners, rather mythical figures battling their enemies.
The fiction often becomes of necessity monologic and centered on an
outsized individual who is “the most powerful,” “the richest,” “the most
satanic,” “the most beautiful,” and so on. The survival of prodigious
heroes and heroines and the battles of villains and victims are the fun-
daments of popular narrative, and to scale down these figures into
dialogizing is to play against epic sizing. Fiedler well describes how our
love of such narratives is our guilty secret as popular readers. He states
that we can’t pretend that such works make us better, wiser, or more
moral or responsive to beauty but rather put us more in touch with the
“perilous aspects of our own psyches, otherwise confessed only in night-
                      The American Inadvertent Epic                     235



mares” (What Was Literature 49–50). Such were the responses generated
in the “inadvertent epic.” The incestuous and miscegenated themes that
Fiedler sees imprinted throughout our national imaginary can certainly
be traced through the immigrant’s tale. To keep everything within the
family, within the kinship lines of descent, is to posit a pure strain of
lineage, enhanced by the family’s network of personal and intimate ser-
vices. The horror and fear are the prescribed assimilation or amalgam-
ation with strangers, Americans, what The Godfather often calls “shrewdies”
or “sharpies” or alien American beings such as Kay Adams’s WASP fam-
ily where her mother serves “boiled chicken” (235) and the parents hardly
seem to know who their daughter is. To become American is to mingle
and to belie not only epic but ethnic purity, to break into the narrative
line with inflected accents from outside the descent culture. Is it possible
that what American reader/viewers sense is that The Godfather censors
this volatile American incestuous and miscegenated material in favor of
a purity such as ethnic descent and nonassimilation that makes Puzo’s
text a newly nativist document of some mandarin antimixing? If the
readers forget or sublimate the Corleones as Italian, they can wallow in
a dream of “same” and “like” with no “others” outside the family. The
epic cast into modern America in The Godfather then would become an
unbroken Sicilian line of inferences, historical conclusions, and “nation-
building” within one family: the Corleones are not only Our Gang but
comprise Our World as readers, a world they have made that looks and
feels like America. Here is identity raised to pathology.
      To describe epic’s fall into fiction is to engage in some complex
generic tracing. Jameson is fascinated by the survival of precapitalist
literary forms such as the epic within realistic and modern fiction and
cites Ernst Bloch’s reading of the fairy tale with its magical wish fulfill-
ments as a “systematic deconstruction and undermining of the hege-
monic aristocratic form of the epic with its somber ideology of heroism
and baleful destiny” (The Political Unconscious 86). The genius of The
Godfather is to encapsulate both frames, the fairy tale and the epic, within
the novel so that reader’s yearnings for family happiness and security
are crossed with the large and mannered inevitabilities and sadnesses of
the epic in which a culture hero might undertake certain actions to secure
his world. Jameson’s adjective of choice to describe the epic’s view of
destiny is baleful, denoting an active evil, full of pain and suffering.
Jameson also uses baleful to describe other dualities that he wishes to
hold continually in suspension when he writes of the “demonstrably
baleful features of capitalism along with its extraordinary liberating
dynamism” (“Postmodernism” 86) and his conception of the heroic saga
unfolding under a “baleful spell,” “furnishing the symbol of domination
by a past which is their only future” (Marxism and Form 130). Such con-
ceptions aptly describe the tragedy of the Corleones as well as their
desperate compact: they live in a present in which the old loyalties and
236                                Chapter 8



resentments in their Sicilian pasts are the only structures in which they
can conceive of an American future. Jameson sees Bloch making a dis-
tinction between the peasant and aristocratic character of the raw mate-
rials of the fairy tale and heroic saga; but surely the role of The Godfather
is to unite the formal opposites in confusion in the popular text, to fuse
“those most naive and emblematic visions of the heart’s desire which are
the table groaning beneath ample bread and Wurstchen, the warm fire,
the children back home happy at last” and “the sentence of doom” hang-
ing “over all the heroic gestures of its characters” (130). Such yearnings
are embodied in the fathers and sons who must go bad in order to sus-
tain the vision of abundance, the urgency to maintain the melodrama of
family against all enemies, Sicilian and American.
      Baleful, indeed, a domestic tragedy masked as triumph, a horrify-
ing contortion of human aims and desires “in the name of the father,” an
appropriation of every patriarchal role imaginable from God himself
through the secular stern and wise father to a powerful American busi-
nessman who provides for his children. By collapsing capitalism, destiny,
and epic under the sign of “baleful,” Jameson historicizes destiny itself,
exposing its ahistorical rhetoric as masking a deep background histori-
cization of oppression and want in the feudal system that nonetheless is
only exacerabated and re-stressed under capitalism. What links the feudal,
precapitalist state and capitalism proper in the Marxist interpretation is the
outline of the theory that matches the diagnosis or application. That is to
say, destiny privileges an inevitability of a prior signification, while Marx-
ism privileges the primacy of the signification to come.
      Jameson consistently tries to distance himself from any prematurely
“ethical” statement that might charge him with moral criticism; nonethe-
less, he tries to find a properly dialectical vantage point that acknowl-
edges pervasive false consciousness as well as the need for a naive
Utopianizing in a reconceived ethical vision. The immigrant saga is al-
ways Utopian in exchanging the present selves, the very lives of the first
generation, for a vision of the future family of children and grandchil-
dren. Immigrant narrative is always Utopian, cutting off the past in favor
of a dimly signified but highly idealized future. Such a denial of the past
is also a denial of epic imagining in the surety of a culture’s depiction.
In a more urgent historical frame than epic’s sonorous one, the sacrifices
of immigrants are not ordained by any austere central government that
collapses individualism and history under a Democratic Year One. They
are, in the spirit of fairy tales, in the service of a “magical narrative,” that
of the American Dream, not so much the streets paved with gold as the
streets paved at all, or more to the point, streets one can walk on without
fear, streets that belong to the people as citizens. The Godfather preserves
what in immigrant narrative is the living memory of a dead past, which
the birth country re-presents in stasis as an oppression (values, language,
custom, tradition) and then converts to the unimaginable future for the
                      The American Inadvertent Epic                     237



American children, a Utopia of education, security, and freedom. Only
the present remains a huge gap or lack that can’t be lived, a composite
of a “never again” (will I bow the neck) and a “not yet” (as in Michael’s
comforting words to an aging Don Corleone, “We’ll get there, Pop. We’ll
get there”). Such a “present” is inimical to the epic which wants only
sureties about the narrative it confidently provides about a culture’s
unfolding. America turns out to be a trickier place than the epic can
account for, a contradictory evolving society that nonetheless needs its
dreams to function.
       Fiedler never wrote a line about The Godfather. He would have been
uninterested in its utter maleness, its lack of racial or gendered insight,
its flat characters, and Puzo’s complete ignoring of psychologized states.
Fiedler’s imagined epic is much more subconscious, the landscape of
American nightmares of race, sex, violence, and family all intertwined,
not so much articulate as chaotic with powerful image upon image tak-
ing the place of any reflective unfolding or artistic control and leading to
a reader/viewer response system also unmanaged where “release of the
repressed is what popular art makes possible” when “the burden of any
system of morality finally becomes irksome” (50). This rather furtive
Dionysian response on the part of the popular reader is unmediated by
social class or professional training. Fiedler suggests this reading beast
lies deep within us and in the national history, the demonic racial tale we
have constructed and find ways to tell ourselves in compensation. Fiedler’s
criticism is never less than national psychic melodrama itself in the ex-
treme terms with which he liberates popular fiction from any stays
whatsoever. He desires, as he says, a canceling of aesthetics and ethics in
favor of what he calls “Ecstatics,” which would be constituted as eclectic,
amateur, neo-Romantic, populist criticism, more concerned with myth,
fable, archetype, fantasy, and wonder (139). That’s certainly one way to
move beyond the conundrum or moral interrogation of The Godfather or
any popular text: shift to an irrational and subversive “outlaw” criterion
of judgment, one as wild or wilder than the trangressive texts them-
selves. Fiedler may want to call American blockbuster books “epic,” but
he casts aside all the ponderous surface of those texts in favor of some-
thing far more psychic in them. His primary examples—Stowe, Mitchell,
Dixon, Haley—are quite middle class and hortatory but appear to un-
leash epic in the guise of melodrama, the popular novel’s rewriting of
American origins and deep structures. Perhaps the epic survives only in
the melodrama of contemporary popular fiction, where it can be human-
ized into tears, rage, and violent necessary deeds. Godfather readers/
viewers just want to see the Corleones cut it, not have them think about
it. Adorno writes of the epic seeming “to be a state of stupidity” in
comparison to “the enlightened state of consciousness to which narrative
discourse belongs,” that this “stupidity” operates in a “restorationist
ideology hostile to consciousness” (18) and, thus, inimical to psychology
238                              Chapter 8



and the subsconscious. Such is the epic or melodramatic hero’s task, to
get on with the nation-building or heroic return and leave introspection
to the poets and critics. The epic traits in Puzo’s Mafia fiction do not
mutate beyond that rigidity. After he wrote his long authorial lament in
Fools Die, Puzo’s remaining trio of Italian American novels, The Sicilian,
The Last Don, and Omerta do not open into the more overtly novelistic
but stay within the rigid and sonorous parameters he had established in
The Godfather.


      Writing the American Mid-Twentieth Century:
           The Godfather ’s Historical Framing

      In chapter 7, I considered how Ragtime not only writes the history
of the early twentieth century but also writes on the origin of the popular
media and entertainment forms that transmit that history to us. Doctorow
is always extremely conscious of these frames. In contrast, Puzo appears
to almost ignore The Godfather’s historical frame (1900–1950) except in
quick extrinsic flashes of Vito Andolini arriving at Ellis Island (more
developed by Coppola in Godfather II), some references to the Don acting
more swiftly and decisively in the Great Depression years than Roosevelt,
and in a few disparaging remarks about Hitler and Mussolini destroying
“their world” and that of Churchhill and Roosevelt. On the whole, The
Godfather appears to take place in somewhat of a vacuum, punctuated by
the murder of Fanucci, a general mob “war” in the early 1930s and peace
reigning until Sonny’s murder finally signals the Five Families War of
1946, also an event that Puzo glosses over very quickly. Similarly, Michael
is a World War II hero, but we never learn the details; we’re given no
flashback scenes to his moments of high courage, merely a quick refer-
ence to a PT boat heroism that almost certainly references John F. Kennedy.
Godfather II does much more historical grounding and extends the family’s
history both west to Nevada and to Cuba where Coppola uses the back-
drop of Castro’s entry into Havana on New Year’s Day 1959 to portray
Michael confronting Fredo’s treachery and that of Hyman Roth. Michael
appears before Senate committees on racketeering; he is outed in a way
his father never was, yet in many ways he is more secretive and alone,
without the personal love and fealty his father demanded and received.
He becomes a melancholy executive and finally a murderer of his own
brother. Rather than falling into American history, he participates in the
fall of his own family. Sonny tells him he’s killing people for strangers in
World War II, but Michael himself is estranged from any and all of them.
Coppola creates a memorable scene of Michael in a limousine, making
his way through the streets of newly revolutionary Havana. Coppola’s
extended frame films Michael from the front, turning his calm slow gaze
to the moiling masses outside his window. The limo stops, and Michael
                      The American Inadvertent Epic                     239



emerges and calls to Fredo to get in the car, that it’s the only way off the
island. Coppola literally shoots Michael as the prince of capitalist and
family darkness; only his silhouette is visible as he speaks. A terrified
Fredo scuttles into the night of Havana’s history rather than face the
hand and judgment of his brother.
       From Puzo’s viewpoint, writing his own historical passage is clear.
Gino in The Fortunate Pilgrim makes the first escape from the family into
American history itself, joining the army after Pearl Harbor. Puzo served
for four years, met his wife in Germany, and wrote The Dark Arena (1955)
about the defeated postwar German landscape and the American pres-
ence there. The novel is very Hemingwayesque in the vein of In Our
Time, beginning with a “Soldier’s Home” vignette of Walter Mosca in the
Bronx where he can no longer connect with his family nor the girl he
loved before the war. Nothing whatsoever is made of his ethnicity. He’s
drawn back to the German ruins and the black market economy where
he can at least find people who’ve gone through what he has. Finally, the
frame changes to that of A Farewell to Arms as Mosca loses his wife, Hella,
to complications after childbirth and then has the obligatory tight-lipped
and rueful tough guy reflections on being bereft and alone in a ravaged
world. The Dark Arena is derivative in mood but well-done in its charac-
terizations and certainly goes against the grain of war novels in centering
on the gray area of “occupation,” scams, and further violence among
emotionally displaced people on both sides. Taken together with The
Fortunate Pilgrim’s exploration of the Italian immigrant experience, it’s
possible by the time of The Godfather, whatever Puzo says about “writing
below his gifts,” that he felt he’d historicized enough, that The Dark Arena
was his World War II novel and that The Fortunate Pilgrim was his immi-
grant novel. Perhaps he saw no reason to truly ground The Godfather in
either setting, though there is some connective tissue linking World War
II to the family’s world. Clemenza believes they should stop the Tattaglias
“like they shoulda stopped Hitler at Munich”; Michael believes that “if
the Families had been running the State Department there never would
have been a World War II” (142); he tells Sonny that Solozzo will be an
easy target: “I’ve been in combat against tougher guys . . . and under
worse conditions. Where the hell are his mortars? Has he got air cover?”
(143). Michael’s intimation after the murder when on a freighter pulling
out of New York harbor is hybrid Hemingway/Puzo: “[H]e felt an enor-
mous sense of relief. He was out of it now. The feeling was familiar and
he remembered being taken off the beach of an island his Marine divi-
sion had invaded. . . . All hell would break loose but he wouldn’t be
there” (153).
       If we can place Michael Corleone in the frame of a World War II
soldier, we can also see him as a returning American war veteran. He
reflects many of the postwar facets of male experience, albeit in a sensa-
tionalized and multiplied frame. Michael comes home first as marine
240                              Chapter 8



hero, where he meets Kay and comments on his family, largely from the
outside. Then he is recruited into the Family war and becomes a combat-
ant, first protecting his father at the hospital from would-be assassins,
where he has his jaw broken by McCluskey. He then commits a double
murder and is sent back overseas to Sicily, reversing the patterns of both
returning war veteran and of immigration itself. Hiding in the hills of his
ancestral homeland, he finds love and passion with Apollonia, but she is
assassinated, another “war” casualty. Michael returns home a second
time, this time as a veteran of his father’s and his family’s war in 1950.
Now his own stewardship of the family begins, and his career path is set.
As with other veterans, he settles down, marries, has two children, and
becomes an executive in training. Puzo links Michael to the millions of
World War II veterans who “[made] their innocent getaway from baffled
loved ones,” survived, and came home to the “cage of family and duty
and a steady job” (Godfather Papers 26).
      The patterning and the outlines of an American male generation at
war and coming home are ratcheted up to a violent degree in Michael
Corleone. What sort of nerve does Puzo touch with Michael as postwar
businessman and husband/father? Elizabeth Long has written that in
American popular novels, “the entrepreneurial definition of success is
celebrated in its most pure and fabulous form,” often in historical or reli-
gious novels (64). Here is where the hero can mutate into roles both grand
and tempestuous, while still showing the nerve and the vision to lead as
a powerful hero where he can be both “god” and “father.” Money and
wealth seem to come almost incidentally, and the tedious details of its
acquisition are basically beneath the fiction. Michael supplants his father
with ease, making executive decisions that are carried out by men who
were of his father’s generation. He carries out his father’s revenge plans
to the letter and achieves his father’s power. The dream is complete.
      No stages of neurosis or narcissism mar Michael’s takeover of power
in The Godfather. He gets to run the company. Such seamless ascension
without psychic conflict clashes with the more familiar elite fiction text
that Richard Ohmann has identified in the American novel of 1960–75, in
which the hero is precisely in flight from the customary ways of making
do in American postwar society, that the needs and values of the mana-
gerial and professional class reached a crisis point of individual and
isolated “illness” in thorough retreat from the American postwar world
of monopoly capitalism (210). It’s as if Ohmann had attempted to invent
the class analysis of Bourdieu from the ground up in the American fic-
tion that begins after the 1950s. He identifies the figure of “childhood” as
what the hero holds onto “against capitalist and patriarchal social rela-
tions” (215), where the adult masquerades as a child emotionally in cri-
sis, where “deep social contradictions” are “transformed into a dynamic
of personal crisis” and the goal for the hero is some “personal equilib-
rium” (217). Such would be the post–World War II American male melo-
                      The American Inadvertent Epic                     241



drama (to amend Baym): abstention, confession, rebellion, often directed
against the father or the absent father, himself a stand-in for culture or
country. To be “true to yourself” is an ethnically unmarked version of
authenticity where one would heroically defeat conformity and allegiance.
       It would be hard to overestimate how thoroughly The Godfather
demolishes these male crises of sensibility as indulgent nonsense. Con-
sider Michael Corleone against the generation of age-group American
fictional heroes and antiheroes of his era: Seymour Glass, Tommy Wilhelm,
Binx Bolling, Neil Klugman, Rabbit Angstrom, Yossarian, McMurphy.
Michael Corleone is never young or neurotic or conflicted, and he does
not take flight or lead quixotic rebellions against authority: he is author-
ity, more like Dirty Harry or the “Man with No Name” in popular genres
of male power. He does not hesitate but plans and carries out the mur-
ders of McCluskey and Solozzo; malaise is never an option. The prob-
lems are clearly delineated, almost totally in a business sense: Who is our
enemy? What needs to be done? How will I do it? He inherits short- and
long-term business strategies (“Your brains or your signature on that
paper”; “revenge is a dish best served cold”). The swiftness with which
Michael becomes an instrument of the Corleone family will is a terrific
marshaling of the son as capital resource. Such an overwhelming re-
sponse, always in place and never countenancing any breakdowns, is a
quite compelling subliminal message filtering through The Godfather at
the height of the Cold War.
      In fact, the Corleones running Cosa Nostra presume an Our World
that needs a “Their World” in contrast and opposition, and what finally
could the Corleones and their opposition signify in 1969 but clearly
delineated heroes and villains in “ways of life” that would fight to the
death for hegemony? Certainly popular fiction often works in code with
and against huge cultural and historical formations. Thus, Uncle Tom’s
Cabin was the great cry against slavery but also expressed a deep struc-
tural lauding of women’s roles as well as expressing a cross-gendered,
cross-racial cry against slavery and ownership of white middle-class
women as daughters, wives, and mothers. Gone with the Wind, partly a
stock Jim Crow tale of the Old and Reconstruction South, nevertheless
had its buried capitalist anthem for the devastated American 1930s read-
ership, that a nation could rise from the ashes in a strong economy and
that women could find themselves free to express their multiple talents;
indeed, Scarlett is a better businesswoman than a romantic heroine. Just
so does The Godfather provide many subliminal consolations. For an
America whose children are running in the streets in 1969, Puzo posits
Michael Corleone running his father’s business and participating in a
just war at the time of Vietnam; the family buries a brother cut down in
combat but takes revenge, and order is restored. Also, the Corleones are
always vigilant as an effective Cold War early warning system. No mas-
sive attack from rival superpower families can succeed, and summit
242                              Chapter 8



meetings are held to insure just that. Even when the missile system that
is Luca Brasi is defused and destroyed, the family continues with new
deterrents. The Godfather provides a strong conservative critique of a
weakened America, a “tolerant” America, which is a source of amuse-
ment to the Corleones, who count on such a society for their success.
Even as they embody a never-ending vigilance to protect themselves,
they bore from within through America’s institutions and mores, provid-
ing a reader and viewership with twin halves of an adversarial pairing;
the Corleones are both “Us” and “Them.”
      In such a reading climate, the secondary aspects of The Godfather’s
structure can be seen as extremely satisfying, in the blanket security they
issue as a family and the threat that thrills the millions. From the depths
of the late 1960s, The Godfather issues its edict: that the Cold War world
(post World War II and post Five Families War) is under Corleone family
control, and they will stay the course. Their children will not rebel against
the family or the country.4 In this family, the son inherits deep peasant
watchfulness and “cunning”; he’s primitive rather than ambiguous,
shrewd rather than conflicted. Action rather than reflection will carry
him through, and he will honor the father. Social contradictions and
hestitancies belong to the therapists and their patients in the elite fiction
of the 1960s, syndromes that The Sopranos will inherit for the mob narra-
tive genre in 1999–2001. The historical and cultural trauma of Vietnam in
the country of the young will be dramatized at the Pentagon, Grant Park,
and Kent State. Meanwhile, Michael in the created Godfather text of the
early 1950s has work to do, he has a world to be defended so “a way of
life” may survive. Thus The Godfather was published at the height of the
Vietnam era collapse of all authority, in the teeth of the battle to justify
the “domino theory” in Asia and to prevent world communism. Gone
with the Wind was a cry from the depths of the Great Depression about
America rising from economic defeat and social prostration. Uncle Tom’s
Cabin was a call for a simpler humanity in 1852 during a low decade of
political and legal compromises that hoped to stave off the collapse of
the American Union and that posited slavery ending in America in God’s
own good time, a relief to politicians on all sides. Inadvertent epics do
not overtly historicize a nation’s master narratives but do so through
deflected and mutated material in which reader and viewer satisfactions
come in coded reassurances against the symbolic cultural collapse pro-
jected in the fiction that stands in for the real American historical crisis.
      Popular fiction after World War II becomes increasingly amoral and
fixated on glamour and consumption. However, the middle-class heroes
who come home to stay in the traces of business after the war become
faceless cogs in a bureaucracy that at best gives them uninteresting work
to do and at worst makes them immoral for the corporation’s sake. Such
definitions are best articulated through the work of sociologists such as
David Riesman in The Lonely Crowd and William H. Whyte in The Orga-
                       The American Inadvertent Epic                      243



nization Man. The Man in the Grey Flannel Suit is a realistic cry against this
faceless and drifting suburban life. What the Corleones offer in implicit
contrast to this domination of the workplace by the anonymous corpo-
rate ethic is the nostalgia of the “family-owned” business, but not a
corner store or small-scale enterprise, rather one as powerful in the world
as a corporation but invisible and far more intimate to the reader and
viewer. As a pleased Hyman Roth says in Godfather II, “Michael, we’re
bigger than U.S. Steel.” A Corleone family member or associate never
fears unemployment, is not personally or politically powerless, is not
bored, and does not inhabit a lock-step routine. However, as in the modern
corporation, whereas Whyte commented that they want your soul, not
your sweat (Long 152), the Corleones demand personal rather than pro-
fessional allegiance, but the thrall is somewhat the same. Daniel Bell
stated that modernist culture had repudiated the central function of all
religions, “the restraint of the self in the service of some transcendent
moral order” (170). The Corleones purport to be quite restrained, only
acting when absolutely necessary; that is their high road. The low road
or compromised version of this charge is Corleones as murdering thugs
in the dregs of American capitalism, in the foul wake of trafficking in the
wastes of human sin and error and preying on the weak. Take your pick.
Puzo “inadvertently” creates a world in melodrama’s residual rendition
of epic that could stand for almost any managed and resolved crisis of
American national, paternal, and business authority: constantly protect
“Our World,” comfort the downtrodden, defend the weak, reap the prof-
its, and stay together.


              Puzo and Copying The Godfather

      Puzo did not become a Godfather publishing machine. Not a prolific
writer before his great success (two novels a decade apart [1955, 1964]),
he published only five more novels between 1969 and his death in 1999.
No genre shelf exists to hold his collected works as is the case for Stephen
King (horror) and Anne Rice (vampires). Puzo did not pursue a subgenre
empire of his own. There was no “Mob Fiction” shelf (although the video
rental stores certainly might offer one) to compete with “Mystery” (a
legion of male and female detectives in series form) or “Romance” (many
different series pitched to different audiences at various levels of
explictness and age group). Other rival male blockbuster writers could
write a series, such as Tom Clancy’s Jack Ryan books. The spy or caper
thrillers of Robert Ludlum, Ken Follett, and Sidney Sheldon also ap-
peared with a metronomic regularity.
      Why was there never The Godfather II, the Novel? Certainly agents,
editors, publishers, and readers would have clamored for such a text.
The answer may lie in several directions. First, Coppola’s two Academy
244                              Chapter 8



Award–winning films (1972, 1974) for which Puzo shared screen writing
credits, forever stamped the features of Brando, Pacino, Duvall, Caan,
Keaton, Shire, and other actors onto a generation of American moviego-
ers. The second film brought Michael’s story a decade further along,
while using much of the immigrant Sicilian material from the novel in
flashback form. As with Gone with the Wind, the brilliance of the first two
Godfather films cast the novel, incredible publishing success that it was,
into a secondary relation to what had become a visually stunning and
rhetorically vibrant tale, one that passed visually into the culture with
lasting force.5 Furthermore, Puzo had never wanted to write The Godfa-
ther during his two decades of chasing the dream of elite literary success.
He tried very hard to escape ethnic typing in his revered art. His wry
acceptance of his destiny as the author of The Godfather did not include
going back into harness as that author. He spent a good part of the 1970s
doing lucrative work in Hollywood, writing or collaborating on screen-
plays after the doors had been opened for him by his Godfather scripts
with Coppola.6 Then the 1970s closed with his writer’s lament and Las
Vegas portrait in Fools Die and the text for the revealing picture book
Inside Las Vegas. Puzo finally did come back to the Mafia subject in three
novels, The Sicilian, The Last Don, and the posthumous Omerta. None of
them really adds insight to his work or to the mob subject or moves
beyond what had been established through the Godfather novel and the
three films with Coppola. Each successive novel suggests that Puzo knew
best that he was finished with mob narrative when he wrote the Corleones
into American fictional and cinematic history and that, having become
legendary to its worldwide audience, the family would have been better
off without Puzo as authorial godfather “pulling a few [more] strings.”
      What Godfather fan could resist the opening pages of The Sicilian?
Michael Corleone is still in Sicily in 1950 after the assassination of his
wife Apollonia with instructions to bring home to his father the legend-
ary Sicilian bandit/Robin Hood Salvatore (Turi) Giuliano. The frustrating
truth about The Sicilian is that Puzo made nothing of the possibilities of
this plot line. Michael is almost inert, never has an interesting thought,
takes very little initiative, and is not shown with any jealousy or resent-
ment of the young Sicilian folk hero who might be his double. They do
not take up arms together, nor do they debate an Old and New World
Mafia or talk of their hopes and dreams. Puzo tantalizingly has Giuliano
(a real historical figure) be conceived in the United States and born back
in Sicily, but this potential dialogizing is not developed. Turi and Michael
never meet in more than four hundred pages, in which Puzo seems to
keep Michael hovering around to tease the reader, even creating a com-
pletely irrelevant book 3 of nineteen pages titled “Michael Corleone,” as
was book 1. The situations that develop around Sicilian figures of local
intrigue are not compelling. Puzo does attempt a history of sorts that
depicts the pressures Sicily was under at the close of World War II, caught
                       The American Inadvertent Epic                     245



among a defeated Fascist state, a Communist insurgency, Mafia presence,
and the hope to create in Italy a civil and unified society. However, all the
detail sinks under Puzo’s dead language, in which description of lan-
guage, custom, and Sicilian society seems to have been sketched in. Turi
Giuliano posesses the “the inborn tactical sense of the born guerilla” (61)
and an “inborn animal ferocity” (145). When he is shot and left for dead,
he “willed his body to heal” (inborn medical skill?), and Puzo allows him
to forego any moral agency in the blithely dotty “he felt a new freedom,
that he could no longer be held accountable for anything he did from this
time on” (90). Puzo signals this new state, writing that Turi and his men
“were vanishing into the beginning of their myth” (70), and readers soon
wish they didn’t have to follow them there. Puzo’s still driving home
bizarre causal chains; the “irony of heaven” dictates that the son of an
abbot becomes a murderer (225); the authorial narrator argues that say
what you will of Sicilians–born criminals, murderers, cunningly treach-
erous—“no one could dispute that Sicilians loved, no, they idolized chil-
dren” (183). Saddled with Giuliano as a monologic and mythic martyr
from actual Sicilian history and Michael as celebrity guest who can’t save
him, the novel never takes on any life.
       If The Godfather never existed, The Last Don might read as a light-
weight but compulsive tour through connecting worlds of Las Vegas,
Hollywood, and the region known as “the Mob.” Puzo created another
omnipotent family in the Clericuzios for The Last Don. They come fully
formed, indeed ossified into an aged boss, his middle-aged sons who are
never really characterized, and a competing third-generation pair of ri-
vals, vicious Dante Clericuzio and the novel’s hero, Cross De Lena. The
mob material is ever closer to the epic and mythic. The Clericuzios live
in New York and Long Island compounds that resemble Old World
gardens; one expects nymphs and fauns to leap out from behind foun-
tains. Their ethnic fantasy enclave in the Bronx is so purely Sicilian, it
should be studied by tribal ethnographers. Indeed, the longer Puzo wrote
about the mob in the United States, the further it receded back into
something close to retired status—calcified, an executive group of bank-
ers and power broker elders full of wisdom but little life force. Puzo’s
real love in The Last Don was the world of movies and gambling, for
which he created entertaining and sensational stories of screenwriters,
directors, stars, high rollers, and casino bosses. Hollywood and Vegas
threatened to break out in The Godfather before Coppola and Puzo pared
down the rambling plot into the taut New York family melodrama of the
first two films. Puzo wrote The Last Don in his mid-70s; it’s no mistake
that Puzo’s three male bosses (Don Clericuzio, Alfred Gronevelt in Las
Vegas, and Eli Marrion in Hollywood) are all aged potentates who men-
tor the young and the ambitious about money and power. Marrion and
Gronevelt die in the novel after sharing their wisdom, and Don Clericuzio
weighs forth at heavily staged moments. The novel’s funniest character
246                              Chapter 8



is the novelist-screenwriter Ernest Vail, a more relaxed Puzo figure than
the grumpy Merlyn of Fools Die, who puts on both the Hollywood and
literary worlds, is “earnest,” pathetic, chatty, and cheerfully depressed
and suicidal. His appearances are always welcome.
      Omerta, Puzo’s last work, is more focused than The Last Don and
begins with an interesting generic twist. The legendary retired Don
Raymonde Aprile is assassinated in New York City, and his ward, Astorre
Viola, the son of a great Sicilian Don who somehow knows “in this two-
year old [son] I see the heart and soul of a true Mafioso” (4); Astorre
spends much of Omerta finding out who has committed the crime. How-
ever, the mystery frame soon dissipates into a confusing cast of overaged
mob guys from America and Sicily. The potentially interesting frames
involve the three Aprile children—Valerius, a West Point military tactics
instructor, Marcantonio, a TV executive in charge of programming for a
major network, and Nicole, an outspoken lawyer who does pro bono
work for foes of the death penalty (perhaps Puzo’s final example of
“casual irony”). She even gingerly takes on her lordly and powerful
father with generic liberal table talk: “The more we [Americans] kill, the
easier it gets to kill. Can’t you see that?” and the improbably chatty and
scolding “Daddy, you are just too ourageous as a moralist. And you
certainly are no example to follow” (50–51). Tony and Meadow Soprano
they ain’t! There’s a very tough black lady police detective, a powerful
FBI agent who can’t decide (much like an American middle-class audi-
ence) whether he admires or loathes the Aprile family (“they destroyed
the fabric of civilization” (19); “I don’t buy this Don bullshit” (266); “You
have to know these people. First they get you into trouble, then they help
you out” (263); and a young Irish woman who aids and abets hit men
and is Astorre Viola’s great love.
      Such a varied cast suggests the chance for a real opening into dia-
logue for Puzo but at the very end of his writing life, he can’t pull off a
twist beyond his conventional views on mob destiny set against “the
safety of organized society” (25) as he describes the nonmob world, which,
more than in any other of his mob texts, the family is ready to join. The
Don’s children, emissaries to more approved corridors of American power
(military, media, legal), largely fall away to spectators as the novel turns
into a series of sensational murder scenes that already appear as separate
screenplay action segments as Puzo remembers the meaning of the occa-
sion of Omerta. Puzo cannot follow through in detail on the possibilities
of Marcantonio Aprile’s power within television America or have Valerius
Aprile show himself a brilliant tactical killer like his father. For the last
time, the interpenetration of mob world and “other” is not realized by
Puzo. However, he does provide a very fitting end to his Mafia chronicles
by having Astorre Viola and Rosie, his love, return to Sicily to live after
all their New York enemies have been vanquished. They ride horses up
through the hills to the town of Corleone, where Astorre gets down on
                      The American Inadvertent Epic                     247



one knee to propose marriage: “she threw her arms around his neck and
showered him with kisses. Then they fell to the ground and rolled to-
gether in the hills” (314).7 Home in Sicily has been reclaimed. Marcantonio
and Valerius “were working together on a project based on their father’s
FBI files” and believe “the Don would have appreciated the idea of re-
ceiving large sums of money for dramatizing the legend of his crimes,”
as close to postmodern self-reflexivity as Puzo ever got. He’s more than
ready to conclude his mob tales because “the old Mafia was dead. The
great Dons had accomplished their goals and blended gracefully into
society” and “why would anyone want to bother with the rackets when
it was much easier to steal millions by starting your own company and
selling shares to the public?” (315). With this final pragmatic opinion
about American capitalism circa 2000, Puzo closes his books, with Astorre
promising Marcantonio Aprile that he’d be available as a consultant on
the TV series about the Aprile family. Puzo himself died in July 1999 after
the conclusion of The Sopranos’ first season on HBO.8
       Accounting for The Godfather’s takeover in the last three decades in
American popular narrative and culture depends on forces beyond Puzo’s
occasional energies and output. In The Last Don, Ernest Vail says it best
in one of his oddly upbeat negative speeches: “Writing novels is a dead
end, like being a blacksmith. It’s all movies and TV now.” He continues,
“[W]hat can you write about passion and the beauty of women? What’s
the use of all that when you can see it on the movie screen in
Technicolor? . . . Actors and cameras doing all the work without process-
ing through the brain. . . . Now the one thing the screen can’t do is get
into the minds of their characters, it cannot duplicate the thinking pro-
cess, the complexity of life” (325–26). Vail may be giving the general
novelist’s brief against cinema, but he also describes Puzo’s own refusal
to ever psychologize his mob characters and give them any inner life in
his novels. Furthermore, the melodrama itself works much better on the
screen than on the page, where adventure, broad gestures, and sensa-
tional action can be much more vivid. Melodrama does not reward the
reader as much as the viewer over and over again in its strengths. There-
fore, the mob family narrative’s continuance predominantly in movies
and television since Godfather II in 1974 can be accounted for in large part
by the visual presentational logic of the generic form best suited for
its production.
       No one film or even combination of films really bridges the period
from the Godfather hegemony (1969 novel, 1972, 1974, 1990 films) to The
Sopranos (1999–2001). Instead, a number of writers, directors, and actors
have contributed to sustaining mob narrative in one form or another, and
only an outline will be sketched here. Sergio Leone, known primarily for
his Italian “spaghetti Westerns” that launched Clint Eastwood’s film career,
directed Once Upon a Time in America (1984), a four-hour epic heavily
symbolized and playing upon memory with most of the action taking
248                              Chapter 8



place in the 1920s and ’30s. Stylized and lyrically presented, Leone’s
work is the most artistically experimental of the major mob films. Along
with Coppola, Martin Scorsese has been one of the most honored Ameri-
can directors in the period, one whose skill had been initially identified
with the presentation of Little Italy in Mean Streets (1973) before he
weighed in with Goodfellas (1990) and Casino (1995). These films provided
a speed and drive that took the mob out of Coppola’s dimly lit formal
rooms and solemn enclaves, past the Old World formality of the Don and
the brooding spirit of Michael Corleone into adrenaline-driven and vivid
dynamics that resemble the rhythms of Sonny Corleone. Scorsese also
domesticated the mob family into scenes from a marriage in the drawn-
out battles between husband and wife in both films. Goodfellas and Casino
pulsate with greed, desire, and sheer menace in ways that The Godfather
trilogy never did. One never knows when scary Joe Pesci is going to go
off as a human timebomb. The shrewd but manic scufflings of Ray Liotta
as mob informant Henry Hill in Goodfellas and the violence between
DeNiro and Sharon Stone in Casino animate the mob cinematic genre in
moment-to-moment intensity and allow Scorsese to give the entire sub-
ject a more realistic feel; he described The Godfather as “epic poetry, like
Morte D’Arthur,” while his own mob “stuff” “is like some guy on the
streetcar talking” and said that his goal in Goodfellas was to convince the
audience “it was hanging out with these guys in a bar” (Keyser 201). The
closeness of audience contact with the Paulie Cicero crime family in
Goodfellas, however, is mitigated by Scorsese’s impersonal almost docu-
mentary style filming, “as if you had a 16mm camera with these guys for
20, 25 years” and screened “what you could pick up” (Keyser 197).9
Goodfellas is closest to The Sopranos in its anarchic middle-class energy but
fails to be intimate with its characters.
       In many respects, the post-Godfather film resurgence of mob nar-
rative is also a throwback to the Hollywood gangster genre of the 1930s.
The early talking pictures, especially before more restrictive production
codes in 1933, dealt with ethnicity, morality, and families split apart (the
proverbial bad apple of a son, his priest brother, and their sufferin’ ma).
The Italian American characterization was often self-evident but not
stressed. Mervyn LeRoy’s Little Caesar (1930) with Jewish American Ed-
ward G. Robinson as “Rico” and Howard Hawks’s Scarface (1932) with
Paul Muni, subtitled “Shame of the Nation” upon its release, were both
loosely based on the life and times of Al Capone. William Wellman’s The
Public Enemy (1931) allowed James Cagney to chew the scenery for the
first time; his molls were Jean Harlow and Mae “Grapefruit” Clarke.10
Humphrey Bogart made a memorable starring debut as on-the-lam
mobster Duke Mantee in Robert Sherwood’s The Petrified Forest (1936).
Film noir kept the crime genre alive in the 1940s and early ’50s, although
the films were not necessarly ethnically inflected. Academy Award–
winning classics such as Elia Kazan’s On the Waterfront (1954) and George
                       The American Inadvertent Epic                     249



Roy Hill’s The Sting (1973), kept eclectically referencing the mob within
story lines, as did Billy Wilder’s Some Like It Hot (1960) with George
Raft’s sublime portrayal of Spats Columbo and Nehemiah Persoff as
“Little Bonaparte.” The mob came to television with The Untouchables
(1959–62) on the FBI’s battle with the Capone family, and Brian DePalma
made a film version of The Untouchables (1988) as well as a remake of
Scarface (1983).11
      Al Pacino has devoted a significant part of his career in reprising
roles in mob-related films, though usually playing against the formal,
cold Michael Corleone persona that made him a star. Pacino’s film ve-
hicles have included gangster reprises in Donnie Brasco (1987) (as a career
mob soldier), DePalma’s Carlito’s Way (1993) (as a Puerto Rican gangster),
and Scarface, as a cop in Serpico (1973) and Sea of Love (1989), and in an
over-the-top role as the SatanFather in The Devil’s Advocate (1997). Other
films have been quirkier at working with pieces of the mob tale. John
Huston’s Prizzi’s Honor (1985), adapted from the novel by Richard Condon,
posits a hit woman married to a hit man and both eager for career ad-
vancement, which can only conclude by taking each other out.12 Careers
of real-life gangsters were run through Puzo’s formula as well. Barry
Levinson’s Bugsy (1992), starring Warren Beatty, went into detail about
the founding of Las Vegas (touched on in the Moe Greene subplot in The
Godfather) by Bugsy Siegel, Mickey Cohen, and Meyer Lansky in the
early 1940s. The Coen Brothers’ Miller’s Crossing (1990) gave the mob tale
their particularly claustrophobic and horrific aura.
      Various memoirs and novels are turned into made-for-TV movies or
Hollywood features: Honor Thy Father (1973), an adaptation of the Gay
Talese book about a Bonanno family son’s tale; the women’s laments Mob
Princess and the comic Married to the Mob (1989); and the women mob boss
fantasy, Jackie Collins’s Lucky/Chances (1990). The most playfully postmodern
film spinoff is The Freshman (1990), in which Brando plays a mob boss
running the ridiculous “endangered species” Diners Club, who looks and
sounds exactly like Don Corleone but isn’t; he has to continually deal with
“aren’t you . . . ?” statements from stunned characters. Don Corleone has
almost become a brand name, as has Brando’s raspy voice and cheeks
stuffed with cotton.13 Thus cinema kept the mob genre alive, along with a
scattering of television series such as Stephen Cannell’s WiseGuy. Analyze
This (1999) with DeNiro as a mobster in need of a shrink and Billy Crystal
as his psychiatrist, while graced by old pros, had the misfortune to match
whimsy against the intensity and intelligence of Tony Sopranos’s psycho-
analysis on The Sopranos. Italian Americans and all other Americans begin
to “speak mob,” as certain phrases and verbal styles make their way into
the mainstream along with products and brand names.14
      Undoubtedly the biggest cinematic generic influence in the 1990s
on the road to The Sopranos was Quentin Tarentino’s Pulp Fiction (1994),
which added crucial formal elements to the mob narrative that hereto-
250                               Chapter 8



fore had been ignored. First, Tarentino’s two hit men, Jules and Vincent
(Samuel L. Jackson and John Travolta), are terrifically verbal creations,
riffing on their jobs, the universe, and fast food in France, with Jules
quoting passages from Ecclesiastes to validate his wrath. They are grum-
bly working men in funereal garb with intensity and a rather dotty ear-
nestness, as well as a purity of action. Yet they most often shade closer
to Laurel and Hardy or a Rosencrantz and Guildenstern as they wait for
for orders from their bosses. Tarentino’s particularly pop sensibility is
replete with references to other films and directors; his energetic Holly-
wood collage has a bounce that oddly humanizes his mob guys by scal-
ing them down through comedy. They are also righteous in their
instrumentality, taking vengeance on those who deserve it on orders,
always subject to powers from above as soldiers in a larger mob world.
Two more significant features of Pulp Fiction were its pulsating score of
eclectic rock music and constant use of strong obscenities in dialogue,
both features that The Sopranos adopted, further overturning The Godfather’s
formal, mournful Nino Roti score and generally less explicit language.
Travolta in his major comeback effort as Vincent Vega was a disheveled,
overweight smiling killer who cleared the way for a James Gandolfini to
play Tony Soprano as another large, amiable predator. Tarentino’s deadly
duo, however winning, still were free-standing islands of rage and snappy
lines. No family was on display for them in Pulp Fiction, which was a
series of interlocking short sketches rather than a serial. That reassociation
of family and business was also left to The Sopranos.
       Ernest Vail’s writer’s view in The Last Don that it’s “all movies and
TV now” (325) suggests Puzo’s resignation from really believing and
working in the novel form. Aging Don Clericuzio in The Last Don has few
pleasures left in his eighties, but one night, after a particularly satisfying
Italian meal, he is in such a good mood that he sits down to watch
television with his daughter, Rose Marie. After four hours “filled with
horror,” he says to her, “Is it possible to live in a world where everyone
does what he pleases? No one is punished by God or man and no one
has to earn a living? . . . Where are the people who understand a piece of
cheese, a glass of wine, a warm house at the end of the day is reward
enough?. . . . Who are these people who yearn for some mysterious hap-
piness? What an uproar they make of life, what tragedies they brew up
out of nothing” (299–300). It speaks volumes that Puzo’s most antiquated
Don is reduced to a querulous TV critic and singer of traditional Italianita.
The Don voices real audience concerns about “pleasure” and “happi-
ness” and the centering on the individual’s nebulous tragedies. He speaks
for hard-core bourgeois values with a dash of peasant solidity for good
measure, almost out of Bourdieu in his precisely naming his simple plea-
sures. He can’t understand such an American television world, but it is
the one that will inherit mob narrative and adapt it beyond the Don’s
                      The American Inadvertent Epic                    251



and Puzo’s imaginings. At the end of of his night as TV critic, Don
Clericuzio does darkly intone, “Everyone is responsible for everything
he does” (300), and this is Tony Soprano’s paranoid truth about his social
role as well as his ideal self, to be the responsible man and on television
to boot.
This page intentionally left blank.
                   chapter nine


              The Godfather Sung by
                  The Sopranos
All my life I wanted to do movies. . . . But I wound up in TV and it pro-
vided a good living. . . . But for me it was always cinema, cinema, cinema.
Now this has been so good. Where am I ever going to go where it’s going to
be this good again?
                                      —David Chase, creator of The Sopranos

Tony Soprano: We wanted to stay Italian and preserve the things that mean
something to us. Honor and family and loyalty. And some of us wanted a
piece of the action.
Dr. Jennifer Melfi: What do poor Italian immigrants have to do with you?
And what happens every morning you step out of bed?
                                                         —The Sopranos, 2, 9

      When a depressed Tony Soprano is prodded by his psychiatrist, Dr.
Jennifer Melfi, to open up about his father and describe the family dy-
namics at home during his childhood, he tells her, “My mother wore him
down to a nub. . . . He was a squeakin’ little gerbil when he died” (Sopra-
nos 1, 1). Such an admission announces we’re not in The Godfather any-
more, though the ghosts are everywhere. Tony is a midlevel mob boss,
but he’s no godfather in powerful control. He is in therapy, on Prozac
and Xanax, in deep conflict about his roles, and convinced that “every-
thing is trending downward” (1, 1). Clearly the genre rules have changed
in The Sopranos; omerta is honored in breach rather than observance. In-
deed, Tony Soprano is encouraged to talk about absolutely everything
that’s down deep in his identity. What is most revealing, in the revision-
ary scope of The Sopranos, is the presence of women with powerful de-
termining roles. Tony’s mother Livia, is a controlling monster. His wife,
Carmela, feels deeply religious misgivings about her and Tony’s life and

                                    253
254                               Chapter 9



would hold him to a higher standard of truth. Dr. Melfi is Italian Ameri-
can and a shrink. Taken together, the Soprano voices in The Sopranos sing
maternal, therapeutic, and moral songs that herald the fact that the series
title is no accident; the heretofore excluded and deflected female charac-
ters of the family business melodrama rise to battle for control of Tony’s
life. The male melodrama still holds center stage, but the songs of the
sopranos are overtures to Tony to know himself, to change, to be a good
man. Such a goal is still a long way off at the end of the third season of
The Sopranos after thirty-eight installments, for it’s the nature of serials to
hold off closure by all means possible.
       The second most significant change wrought by The Sopranos in
the mob narrative as bequeathed by The Godfather and its successors is
its televised series format, which allows for and dictates a greater com-
mitment to realism and a more intimate relation to the Soprano family,
in the tradition of America’s time-honored television family dramas.
The TV format also invites comparisons of Tony Soprano to other fa-
mous television fathers. Tony Soprano may be no Vito or Michael
Corleone, but he’s no Jim Anderson or Ward Cleaver or Ricky Ricardo
either. No previous American TV series has featured a murderer in a
continuing heroic role and certainly not a father and husband as mur-
derer. A two-hour movie often attempts to push an audience toward
such heroic identification by defining the “justifying” circumstances in
outlaw psyches, a cinematic tradition most often linked to Bonnie and
Clyde (1967) and The Godfather; however, Tony and his crew are there
week after week clubbing and murdering rivals when necessary, in
between family gatherings, soccer games, college tours, trips to see
Mother and to the gardening center to get weed killer, attendance at
confirmation parties and school chorales. They just do what they do.
“Leave the gun. Take the cannoli,” Peter Clemenza’s famous instruction
in Godfather I after Paulie Gatto is shot in the head in the Meadowlands,
gave a disorienting quotidian twist to mob assassination. Clemenza’s
wife had asked him to go the bakery and her “order” was of equal
importance. Such an incongruity in The Godfather is built into moment-
to-moment structural fact in The Sopranos.
       Television, the most intimate of American appliances and most
routinely used in the home, is equally the most fitting place for the
Soprano family to be captured by narrative at home. Even as the Ameri-
can Western moved from The Virginian to High Noon to Gunsmoke, even
as the detective genre moved from Hammett and Chandler to Bogart in
The Maltese Falcon and The Big Sleep and then to Dragnet, Miami Vice, Hill
Street Blues, and NYPD Blue, so the mob narrative follows what seems to
be an iron law of media’s copying logic: from the page to the large screen
to the small screen. The destiny of generic popular forms is finally to be
domesticated and turned back to the American public in the most com-
prehensive cycling through bourgeois values and their interrogation on
                    The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                 255



television. To bring mother-haunted Tony Soprano before the bar of his
female psychiatrist’s principles and his wife’s prayers is to finally force
godfathers in mob narrative into a moral inquisition in the home in the
popular medium best suited to domesticate the entire subgenre in ways
that Puzo could never countenance or conceive. The Sopranos is always
already mediated by The Godfather and self-consciously aware of the fact
as it continues the popular business of producing the family business. To
score The Godfather as sung by The Sopranos on television is to establish
the suppleness of the American form of mob narrative to continue to
develop and acquire new significations in a different medium.


               Living in Godfather America:
             The Sopranos and Self-Reflexivity

      What most centrally links The Godfather to The Sopranos is that Tony
Soprano and his family live in an America that has been completely
colonized by The Godfather itself. Indeed one constraint on Puzo in mak-
ing his later novels such as The Last Don and Omerta more contemporary
is that he was the one mob narrative writer who couldn’t reference The
Godfather! The novel was the best-selling American fictional text of the
1970s. Coppola’s unprecedented two Academy Awarding–winning films
(1972, 1974) established visual images and language sequences for mil-
lions of viewers worldwide. Testimonials of The Godfather’s influence on
individual lives as well as art come from quite valid sources. Sammy
“The Bull” Gravano, self-confessed murderer of nineteen men for the
Gambino crime family, who turned evidence against flamboyant New
York crime boss John Gotti, spoke of his admiration for Puzo “knowing
the life cold” and through The Godfather making “our life seem honor-
able”; “Sammy the Bull, “ himself the subject of a made-for-TV movie,
calls Puzo “some kind of genius” (NYT Magazine, January 2, 2000).1 Michael
Imperioli, the actor-screenwriter who deftly plays Christopher Moltisanti,
Tony Soprano’s volatile young nephew and boss-in-training, said in an
interview, “[W]hen we were kids, The Godfather was hero worship to us
and made us proud to be Italian. We had pride in these characters. We
didn’t feel revulsion for them” (Fresh Air Sunday, March 12, 2000).2 These
admissions from a convicted murderer and a key Sopranos player indi-
cate the enormous influence of Puzo and Coppola’s texts in defining
verisimilitude, courage, and ethnic pride over several decades. Living in
the wake of Puzo’s imaginary, both the actual mob culture and its rep-
resentational mirror were wholly captivated; the audience for The Sopra-
nos was “made” by The Godfather, “made,” too, in the sense of personal
fealty, having killed for the family and been bound over to them. The
Corleones “made” the audience by compromising the viewers’ primary
sense of outrage over their deeds. Having sympathized and affiliated
256                               Chapter 9



with the mob family for more than thirty years, the audience long ago
joined Sammy the Bull and Imperioli in assent and complicity.
       The aura of The Godfather hangs over The Sopranos, not only in the
way the culture treats the Sopranos as dangerous mob “celebrities” but
also in the very language they use among themselves to describe them-
selves. Precious little humor exists in Puzo’s writing; his Corleones have
no figures to imitate. However, Tony’s gang is full of spontaneous God-
father turns. Silvio Dante is always ready with his hangdog face and
droopy lip to do a Michael (“just when I thought I was out, they sucked
me back in”; “our true enemy has yet to reveal himself”). Tony, curiously,
never joins in the riffs; sometimes he smiles, but more often he simply
tolerates the by-play. It would appear he is having enough trouble trying
to become the Godfather. Father Phil, Carmela’s young priest and shy
romantic admirer, is also a movie buff, who hovers around the Soprano
home and asks Carm about Tony’s movie tastes: “which movie does
Tony like best, [Godfather] I or II?” and “what did Tony think of Goodfellas?”
       Other uses of Godfather material are more intricate and playful. The
Sopranos (2,4) opens with a screen shot: “FBI Warning” on copyright in-
fringement about pirated or stolen tapes; we quickly see that it’s Tony
and the boys in the back room of their strip joint Bada Bing, trying to
screen a print of Godfather II on a stolen DVD player, one of a shipment
they’re fencing. Silvio and Paulie make much of the fact that these are
“the alternate takes” on a “bootleg” version. Just so is The Sopranos the
latest alternate take or creative infringement on Puzo’s formula. Further-
more, in the real-time world of the Soprano gang, FBI Warnings are
everywhere. Tony’s closest confederate and childhood friend, Salvatore
“Pussy” Bompensiero, has turned informant for the FBI; the bureau has
the mob’s photos stacked up on its office wall in order of rank, like
movie posters or Politburo members; agents regularly search the Soprano
home. When the DVD player doesn’t work, the guys alternately curse it
and hit it. Tony asks, “[W]hata ya’ gonna do? Call Coppola for ideas on
how to fix it?” Paulie adds, “Someone should tell Paramount Pictures to
get their shit together. We’re gonna be stealing thousands more o’ these
tings.” As usual, the Godfather rap begins, Silvio intoning, “It was you
Fredo . . .” Asked “what’s your favorite line?” Tony moans, “I can’t have
this conversation again,” but when pressed, he speaks of the old Don’s
villa in Corleone, Sicily, how quiet it was with the crickets and the great
old house; he feels there the peace he wants and needs in the present.
Always impatient, Christopher lives in the present and doesn’t like to
trade Godfather trivia with his elders any more than Tony. A movie buff
and aspiring actor-screenwriter, he just wants to see the film and impa-
tiently fusses with the machine until Paulie provides the usual solution
to a Soprano gang problem; he beats the DVD player with a baseball bat.3
       The Godfather epic never takes itself as anything less than utterly
seriously. It does not know itself as the object of cultural adulation with
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                  257



the resulting terminal stiffness of its already formal presentation only
heightened in retrospective reading and viewing over the decades. How-
ever, Chase’s conception of the mob narrative is thoroughly at home in
the postmodern self-reflexive and image culture. The Sopranos tries to
work within as many frames as it can, including those of The Godfather,
keeping them all alive and keeping its audience edgy and slightly off-
balance, generally in a ceaseless delight at the cultural interpenetration.
In the very first episode of year one, Christopher pushes a body into the
Jersey Meadowlands swamp and intones, “Lewis Brazi sleeps with the
fishes,” which makes Pussy, a generation older and a Godfather purist,
wince and tell him it’s “Luca Brasi.” “Whatever,” Christopher retorts, in
true contemporary slackness. The Godfather has become general cultural
currency. Chase can use the citation to limn the communication problem
between Christopher and Pussy and create within comic frames. The
“sleeps with the fishes” reference comes brutally home in the last epi-
sode of year two when Tony figures out that Pussy is a traitor to the
family. In a dream sequence he confronts Pussy as one of the fish packed
in ice at a beach stand at the Jersey Shore; Pussy as fish says, “[T]hese
guys on either side of me, they’re asleep” and reveals his treachery. By
the end of the hour, Tony and the gang have shot Pussy to death at sea;
the last image of The Sopranos’ second season is of the Atlantic waves
rolling in. The extended scenes with Pussy are sad, hilarious, and mov-
ing, yet begin as wonderfully referential to the source in The Godfather.
One of postmodernism’s more simple aesthetic pleasures is the audience’s
acknowledgment of self-conscious borrowing or quoting of material from
other texts, creating the tacit assumption that familiar, exhausted, or plun-
dered styles and subjects created in a new mix become the definition of
the “new.”
      No single vehicle has so well captured America’s decades-long af-
fair with mob narrative as does The Sopranos. Chase is unrelenting in his
portrayal of a culture and media industry so deeply imbued with what
could be called “Godfatherness” that there is no way out to an original
or summary statement of influence and effect, origin and separation. The
most brilliant single Sopranos hour to capture the climate of America’s
cross-referenced and utterly implicated relation to mob narrative is the
seventh show of year two in which Christopher gets to be with a film
company on location, and later the film’s “development” director and
writer tentatively walk on the wild side with him as they strive to be
“authentic,” to enhance what they think of as the power of their work.
The sadness and hilarity that result form a grimly comic picture of a
culture so in love with sensation and violent imagery that Christopher,
a truly dangerous and troubled young man, becomes a literal savant of
instinctive movie-making and a source of mob lore, even while retaining
his explosive core personality and exposing the craving of the industry
and audience for more such stories.
258                              Chapter 9



      Christopher’s relation to film and narrative production is the most
complex in The Sopranos and most in line with the postmodern. Christo-
pher is enamored of movie-making and figures if he can’t be “made” by
and for Tony, then he can go to Hollywood to write, perhaps star in films
about the mob and play himself. He sends away for “Movie Magic Screen-
writer” software and is baffled when it doesn’t magically do most of the
writing for him. He quits an acting class after battering another student
in a class exercise; his classmates and the instructor are very impressed
with his fire, but Christopher finds it much too close to his real life. He
then pitches his script in a garbage can, where it’s retrieved by his faith-
ful girlfriend, Adrianna. Chase’s truth, of course, is that Christopher
perhaps can make more money by writing a film about the mob than by
joining it as a fully made member. The work would be lucrative, easier,
less threatening, and who could know more? When he actually hooks up
with the film company through his cousin’s girlfriend Amy, a script
development girl, his crisis of allegiance to Tony heightens. The film’s
screenwriter, played perfectly in character by Hollywood actor-writer
Jon Favreau, comes sniffing around Christopher as the real thing, whereas
Christopher himself wants to turn his mob reality into film and money.
      When Christopher visits the movie set in Soho, he’s like a star-
struck kid during the shooting of the movie’s climactic scene. Amy ex-
plains that the director, fresh from a triumph “at Sundance” with a “lesbian
romantic screwball comedy,” is now into “more mainstream” work and
the film, Female Suspects, is about lesbian spies and girlfriends. The two
lovers, played by Sandra Bernhard (Christopher gauchely points and
blurts out, “I know her. King of Comedy, right?”) and Janeane Garofalo,
have just shot each other; they both lie bleeding in a garbage strewn
alley, and Favreau and the woman director are looking for some pithy
dialogue to cap the big climax. Christopher goes wide-eyed when he sees
Bernhard hold a huge gun with a silencer; it’s too close to his real life.
Amy solemnly whispers to him that the silencer symbolizes the heroines’
silenced voices in society. The director calmly wonders whether Bernhard
should shoot Garofalo again and what she might say: “bitch” seems too
tame for the occasion. They debate a bit, whereupon Christopher strides
forward and points to Bernhard, saying, “Have that one call that one
“bucchiaccio.”4 When everyone draws a blank, Christopher repeats the
word. Favreau and the director say it sounds pretty good—but what
does it mean? “It means ‘cunt,’ ” he answers. No one bats an eye: sounds
good to them. So be it, and Christopher has become an instant script
doctor. The amoral blankness of the movie company’s decisions in the
empty, vulgar climax to the scene perfectly reflects its vacuous and vio-
lent movie itself. Christopher’s instant expertise comes out of his own
obscene and violent world from which he is an ambassador in his vitality
and “authenticity.” Thus does Chase satirize the movie company with
his own production company that nonetheless is exploiting precisely what
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                   259



Christopher knows and what Chase knows the audience knows about
what Christopher knows.5 Postmodern critique here takes on a complex-
ity rarely achieved on television through any genre.
       After the filming, Favreau and Amy go into a neighborhood joint
with Christopher, eager for more “authentic” experience. They want to
hang with him to enhance what they think of as the power of their work.
Christopher points out that across the street where a laundromat now
stands was the restaurant where Willie Moretti stuck his gun in Tommy
Dorsey’s mouth and bought Sinatra’s contract from him for a dollar.
Favreau thinks it’s so cool: “[T]hat’s like the inspiration for Johnny Fontane
and the studio boss in GF I.” Having immediately shifted the historical
anecdote to the movie reference, because it’s both his job and the culture’s
desire, Favreau says that he’d like to do a film on mobster Joe Gallo, to
show that he really wanted to grow, to learn, and to paint (presumably
like Christopher), that he was a “flawed and blinkered guy.” Christopher
dismisses the Gallo reference, saying that it happened when he was three
years old, and besides, he says “learnedly,” there’d already been a film
made of it, The Gang That Couldn’t Shoot Straight. Christopher also wor-
ries that Favreau isn’t authentic enough, that he doesn’t understand the
life or culture; he frankly tells Favreau that his heroes in Swingers (1996)
were modeled on “Frank and Dean,” but there was a “pussy-assedness”
to it, to which Favreau readily caves, becoming more obscenely collo-
quial to converse with a native, adding eagerly that “you can tell me the
way shit goes down, the way people really talk.”6 Finally, Christopher
sees a shadowed figure out the window, shudders, and tells Favreau and
Amy a chilling story about her, a transsexual hooker whose customer, a
mob guy, was so outraged at finding out she was a man that he poured
acid all over her. At which point, without a tear or missing a beat, Amy
says, “Crying Game.” Instantly the horrifying story is converted to a movie
I.D. and a response referencing another film. Throughout their conversa-
tion, Favreau and Amy convert life into film reference, whereas Christo-
pher knows to keep them separate. Christopher warns them that the
anecdote compromises the masculinity of a made man and cannot be
told: “[T]his kinda thing is unacceptable where I come from,” both the
male sexual humiliation and the telling of it. Sure enough, Amy imme-
diately writes a script treatment of Chris’s story, and, when he goes
ballistic over her pillage, her defense is, “[Y]ou said the guy met the
transsexual at a swing set in the park. This guy gets his dick sucked at
the Statue of Liberty.” To cinch the deal, she adds, “Oliver [Stone] wants
to see it.”
       Absolutely everything in The Sopranos, no matter how grotesque,
violent, or intimate is instantly to be converted into genre or quick, extrin-
sic reference. No boundary line exists between “material” and “product”
for Favreau and Amy who are just as fragmented as poor Christopher.
Christopher has story conferences with Amy and then with Favreau, in
260                               Chapter 9



which he tries to pitch his own screenplay and become bonded in the
movie business. They treat him warily, always on edge about his violent
potential to go off and somehow implicate them; he, however, acts like a
young friendly bear, seeking advice on his work, wanting to be in their life.
In their reactions to Christopher, Chase beautifully captures much of the
audience’s reaction to the Soprano mob world and by extension to all of
mob narrative. Christopher overflows with “the real thing”; they want to
stay tuned to the buzz he gives off, the whiff of danger, and remain safely
behind the camera.7
      Favreau approaches Christopher almost as a heroic athlete, asking
haltingly, “[C]an I ask you—have you ever . . .”; Christopher toys with
him, saying loudly he’s not going to answer unless he asks, “[D]id I
what, have I ever what?” Favreau asks if Christopher is “strapped.”
Christopher pulls out his gun and flips it to him, making Favreau almost
queasy. As Christopher playfully cuffs him for the gun, he asks, “Whaddya
think of my script?” Favreau, now really afraid of Christopher but not
wanting to show it, begins to ramble, giving script advice in an im-
promptu story conference but all the time prudently wiping his finger-
prints off Christopher’s gun, implicitly reminding the audience what
Christopher does for a living. Christopher is so exuberant over this
Hollywood insider’s advice that he exults, “Fucking brilliant!” puts the
gun to Favreau’s head, says “Blam, blam,” and then kisses him. Favreau
practically faints, so lost in Christopher’s ethnic and male effusiveness
that he can’t script; he has lost control of his scene and is finally too close
to what he both needs and fears. The audience watches fascinated, never
more intimate with the potential life-threatening world of the Soprano
family than when Christopher innocently plays with a vulture from the
commodity culture who would capture his aura. Such a complex trans-
action is captured within the vehicle that is The Sopranos itself and would
not have been possible or even meaningful without the genre and aura
that The Godfather authorized in the 1970s.
      Far from the vows of omerta, everyone wants to script mob narra-
tive as product, including benighted young gangsters such as Christo-
pher, who really does see becoming a made mobster or a screenwriter as
equal career opportunities. Christopher comes trailing real danger from
a world of violent men, which movie makers crave for their audiences.
However, in the relationship between the mob and cinema in The Sopra-
nos, it’s clear that Chase sides with Christopher as more open, resource-
ful, and alive. He’s sensual, immediate, and ambitious in ways not
controlled by jargon or status, beyond his allure for Favreau and Amy as
icon and “consultant.” Cinema and television constantly search for van-
tage points and more material from which to depict a Christopher and
in fact idolize and disparage him at the same time. Behind their layers of
other film references, other directors, and technical jargon, they believe
they do it for us—the audience for lesbian lover-murderers screaming
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                  261



“cunt” at each other—the same audience that chooses to watch The So-
pranos, which not only has a viewpoint on this dynamic but is this dy-
namic. There is no way back to a clear separation of mob life or its
cinematic or television presentation for the viewer or critic, nor is it
possible to ignore the reified status of “mob narrative” itself as it
overdetermines every relation in The Sopranos. As Garofalo says to Chris-
topher when he comes back to the set, “[D]o you have more stuff like
that I can use?” “Authentic” obscenity grounds the ethnic mob language
that is the lingua franca of an entire subgenre. Christopher himself par-
tially understands the game. When pointing to Bernhard and Garofalo,
he objectifies them as “that one” and “that one,” realizing that Sicilian for
“cunt” and the possibility of more gunplay is all that the audience for
this screen classic will need to know. Who cares who the actresses are or
the characters they play? Anything we can use to feel more dangerous,
visceral, and alive drives us to consume The Sopranos, which then depicts
our moral nightmares with intensity and intelligence. The Sopranos rep-
resents its audience, the producers, actors, writers, and Soprano family
members in a referential matrix that includes the legacy of decades of
Godfather narrative and descendants
       Christopher as a naif in this dreamland is both a supplicant with a
screenplay and a most feared agent of doom; he finally is asked by Tony
at the end of the episode to choose between “whatever the fuck is calling
you out there” in a Godfather-besotted half-world of screenwriting dreams
and their promise and where he should be with Tony: “[Y]our actions
should show you want to be with me every fucking day.” Christopher
walks back into Tony’s house on the day of Tony’s son’s confirmation
and votes for “primary experience” with the Soprano family, his excur-
sion into postmodern mirrors provisionally at an end. The world outside
the Soprano family makes no sense to him; the world inside may be
dangerous and death-haunted, but he knows the rules. It is unclear how
the viewer can tell the difference between poor fragmented Christopher
as murderer and peripatetic Christopher as script advisor on screen in
The Sopranos.8
       Chase knows that he is describing this postmodern climate from
inside, from this Sopranos episode that is within the sensational mob nar-
rative paradigm itself rather than above it or outside it. Indeed, while
Christopher debates going back inside to join Tony, Pussy Bompensiero,
who is standing up for Anthony Jr. at his confirmation, sits sobbing up-
stairs in the Soprano bathroom, tormented by his love for Tony, his need
to save himself, and his treachery to the family. Unlike Christopher, who
flirts with the movies and comes home to Tony, Pussy is giving his mob
narrative to the FBI and has even agreed to wear a wire to the confirma-
tion. As Tony gathers his family for the official confirmation portrait, he
exclaims, “Where’s Pussy? Where’s the Godfather?” This void at the center
of The Sopranos is always telling; no patriarch, no authoritative voice, no
262                                Chapter 9



core reality or way in to one. Christopher has more commodity value than
Pussy the informant, née godfather. What makes The Sopranos a dialogized
delight is precisely its willingness to place itself as an artifact in the tangled
intertextual web of America’s love affair with what The Godfather has
wrought, to face the mystification that is our attraction—repulsion to
Christopher, Tony, Pussy, and the family and to implicate the popular
arts—cinema and television—that have become dependent on it, even as
the Sopranos know their commodity representation defines them as surely
as any further crimes they could commit in society.
       Christopher’s decision to stay with Tony has its analogue in Chase’s
own career decision to stick with television. He admits that despite a long
career in series television as writer, producer, and director, “all [my] life I
wanted to do movies. . . . But I wound up in TV and it provided a good
living. . . . Now this has been so good. Where am I ever going to go where
it’s going to be this good again?” (Carter, “He Engineered a Mob Hit” 90).
In terms of his cultural capital, Chase’s trajectory reverses that of Puzo.
He’s engaged in perfecting the popular toward an elite status in terms of
aesthetics and referentiality, whereas Puzo himself slid to what he called
“beneath his gifts” and couldn’t really respect himself or his form. To
Christopher and to Chase, “coming home” to Tony Soprano is a fortunate
fall that gives much greater sanction to postmodern hybridized genres and
the cutting between popular and elite. The Godfather in a sense fathered
such generic flexibility, but Puzo no longer sired its children.


                    America in Therapy:
               The Sopranos Sings for a Nation

      In discussing the transmission of the epic through the novelistic
(chapter 8), I noted Adorno and Lukacs speaking of epic as the childhood
of the race, that a certain naive portrayal coheres through the unfolding
of an epic tale. Lukacs shifts the focus of the surviving epic hero to the
novel; he says the novel objectifies the psychology of that hero (60). Tony
Soprano is an epic character being driven into a more novelistic self-
reflection. He suffers true birth pangs as he enters psychotherapy in the
narrative that inevitably drives him as analysand back into childhood.
Fiedler also spoke of the American “inadvertent epic” as the vehicle
wherein our personal and communal dreams are conflated, allowing us
to express “the dark side of our ambivalence toward what any status quo
demands we believe” and “to acknowledge men’s hatred of women and
women’s contempt for men, along with the desire of parents to possess
utterly or to destroy their children, and the corresponding Oedipal dreams
of those children” (What Is Literature 41). Fiedler appears to identify the
full force field of family relations all the way from popular fiction up to
Greek tragedy, but he does not see this terrible truth-making in popular
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                 263



fiction leading to any transgressive knowledge because most popular
narrative “tends to be weak on the cognitive and formal levels” (49).
Tony Soprano may be depressed for all of us, but he does not often come
through to any hard-won wisdom, nor do we through his story. In fact,
if pressed, Tony would probably say that he is trying to become a better
mob boss through therapy, to fix what is broken in order to become more
like his idealized self in power. However, Tony is consistently reduced to
a raging child who is sometimes kind or good, but most often a grown
man whose power is slowly killing him in ways that he can’t afford
to acknowledge.
       By placing a mob boss in such a vulnerable position in analysis,
Chase is creating a wholly different relationship for a “Godfather” with
the American audience. The problems of Tony’s violence and his com-
promised reign at the head of the Soprano family are not only ethnically
and criminally marked in the contemporary period; they are seen to be
pervasive crises of maleness in America. Men circa 2000 must be rehabili-
tated past their abusive and wounding natures. They are encouraged to
get in touch with their depression, which they mask with rage that may
be covering their sorrow (to borrow from Dr. Melfi’s extended explana-
tion to Tony).9 The Sopranos in serial format would portray Tony on the
road to new insight through a deeper understanding and a resultant
refashioning of his psyche. Tony is damaged and does damage, but The
Sopranos hardly gives up on him; indeed, his male melodrama is still the
focus of the plot in the remarkably hearty and sustained twentieth-cen-
tury-long cry of the American male that job, family, and home are not
nearly enough for him and that he may be perennially caught in the
wrong life. This strain of American male anxiety in post–World War II
America has roots in the more WASP suburban fiction of Cozzens, O’Hara,
and Cheever and in many of the male melodrama films of the late 1950s,
recently dubbed “male weepies.”10 That we are in a thorough revival of
this familiar suburban disaffection can also be seen in the Academy Award-
winning American Beauty (1999), though the disillusioned character played
by Kevin Spacey in his free-floating and general disaffection does not
touch the complexity of Tony Soprano’s portrayal. The advantages of
thirty-eight hours to unfold the private, public, and subconscious lives of
its principals give the television series a decided advantage over its two-
hour movie-formatted rival.
       The Sopranos thus richly unites the contemporary culture’s two stron-
gest narrative representations of love and family: movies/television and
therapy and the inevitable conflation of the two in The Sopranos itself.11
If Christopher can’t make it in the mob by becoming Tony’s symbolic son
in whom he will be well pleased, he can write about it and perhaps make
his own movie. Tony wishes to cease being “Mama’s Boy,” to be healed
in analysis, which is another fantasy form of breaking away into “free-
dom” and personal success. Christopher wants to break into the business
264                              Chapter 9



family’s inner circle; Tony wants to know why being there is killing him.
Melodrama drives characters to internalize their social, economic, and
class conflicts (Landy 14) and both Christopher and Tony strive to ex-
plain their roles through a strong narcissism and self-referentiality, the
favorite middle-class conversions of choice in the ruse that everything is
personal and about individual freedom in America. Such intertextuality
in The Sopranos (Christopher wants in, Tony wants help, the movies and
TV want them as product) suggests that there is no “legitimate” or “larger
American society” that could be defined by a liberal pluralism, that such
a touchstone hypothesized by viewers and critics is a creation of a liberal
false consciousness, that nothing about the Sopranos’ world is uncon-
nected or unmediated. That is a conclusion that the wary and paranoid
mob bosses and their soldiers would fully endorse on an empirical level.
      Such hard facts hang heavily over Tony and Dr. Melfi, whose weekly
sessions become the viewers’ regular appointments with them on HBO.
Tony initially begins in instinctive mistrust of the patient’s role. He
mumbles to Melfi on first meeting in Sopranos (1, 1) that everybody has
to go to “shrinks, counselors, Sally Jessy,” wondering for the rest of
America, “where does it stop?” and points out that Gary Cooper wasn’t
in touch with his feelings; he was a “strong silent type, that was an
American.” Tony marks himself as contemporary and a class aspirant: “I
had a semester and a half of college. . . . I understand Freud. I under-
stand therapy. But in my world it doesn’t go down.” Tony is no stereo-
type of comic mistrust about psychoanalysis. Chase thoroughly depicts
Tony’s half-knowledge, his contemporary familiarity with analysis but
also his clichéd misgivings about heroic males opening up and his firm
sense of himself segmented off (“my world”) where silence should still
reign. He has learned as much from Vito Corleone and Gary Cooper as
he has from his father, “Johnny Boy” Soprano. Melfi and Tony’s sessions
are fascinating for the sense of realism they impart to the analytic process
and the way their insights underwrite the larger Sopranos narrative. They
comprise the most sustained dialogue we possess to date in popular
narrative on the morality of the mob and mob rhetoric in explanation for
conduct across a range of individual and collective practices in American
society and popular culture.
      Melfi works heroically if warily with Tony, wending their way
through his depression. However, after three seasons of therapy, Tony’s
world and world view have altered less than they have impacted on her
own as psychiatrist and moral individual. Tony is a stunningly hard case,
both in his revelations and in his resistance to her questions. By the end
of year two, Tony has survived a botched assassination attempt, a major
FBI indictment for a murder he committed, and numerous attempts to
infringe on control of his business interests. Melfi, on the other hand, has
developed an alcohol problem, her sessions with her own shrink are
consumed by discussions about Tony, and her boyfriend has been beaten
                    The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                265



by a cop on the Soprano payroll. Because of Tony’s mob problems, Melfi’s
own life has been placed in danger, and she is forced to run her practice
for a brief period out of a motel room. She becomes increasingly in-
volved in her responses to Tony’s brutal acts and descriptions. She takes
his case and progress as a great professional challenge and a matter of
personal ethical and moral necessity. She is, of course, half in love with
him and he with her in patient-therapist transference; their relation goes
very deep, for she must represent both the mother and the wife he resists
as well as his relief from the pain of both figures.
      Such dramatic and sustained tension between Tony and Melfi is
light years from anything Puzo cared to conjure up for the male and
female Corleones. Michael’s stonewalling before Kay’s erratic question-
ing is simple wordplay in comparison to Melfi’s interrogation of Tony’s
most cherished beliefs and defense mechanisms about himself as father,
son, and crime family boss. Again and again, Melfi responds to Tony’s
admissions with the stock analyst’s question of “[H]ow did that make
you feel?” Her continual probing signifies the essential call-and-response
rhetoric of analysis as one of melodrama with a sentimental emphasis on
the emotions rather than on reason, which is seen as the line of defense
against feeling that must be pushed through to a truth that is down
deeper, in darkness and the past, within family trauma and early sorrow.
The narrative of analysis combines powerful aspects of both elite fiction
and criticism (multileveled plot and theme, complex characterization,
“hidden meaning”) with popular fiction (sensational revelations, sexual
and violent action at root of human behavior, family “romance” in early
childhood at the core of personality and character beyond historical,
political, and economic referents). The Sopranos brilliantly exposes how
analysis plays both elite and popular narrative roles.
      Most of Melfi’s questions drive Tony into defensive positions about
his identity, where he tries to explain who and what he is. Their dia-
logues often speak to issues in America’s love affair with mob narrative
back through decades of the Corleones and their successors, who won
over a vast audience. She forces Tony to ask: what did I do? what does
it mean? what am I responsible for? how can I justify my life? doesn’t
everyone do this in some way? how did I get to be this person? These
questions are the audience’s questions as well and date back in mob
narrative to Woltz’s and Kay’s quandaries in The Godfather. And Melfi
doesn’t let Tony get away with facile answers. In Sopranos (1, 7), when
Tony gives her his seductive half-smile and says, “[M]aybe it’s in the
genes,” Melfi counters with a more precise professional term saying that
“genetic predispositions are just that,” and then asks about “free will.”
He comes back hot and colloquial as always: “[Y]ou’re born to this shit.
You are what you are.” Melfi then says “[W]ell, then, that is a range of
choices. This is America,” Tony disparagingly responds, “Right, America.”
Such is the barebones sparring in a much larger debate between them for
266                               Chapter 9



the audience of mob narrative about cause and effect and moral respon-
sibility. Melfi becomes the reader/viewer’s interrogating imagination and
response to Soprano predation and dominion. She’s the first created
character in decades to be granted the license to sit a “godfather” down
and repeatedly fire away with the ethical and moral weight of society,
medicine, and outraged female nurture behind her authority. The more
Melfi convinces Tony that his mother is at the root of his unhappiness
(which Tony reduces to “poor parenting,” since he’s a true son of the
Freudian century and knows the language of the tribe), the more he’s
outraged when she questions him in his historical role as immigrant
descendant, patriarch, and gangster, reminding him that he is “free” to
choose a range of behavior. Ann Cvetkevich has commented that “psy-
choanalytic institutions and models are central to the formation of mod-
ern disciplinary power, which enables the control and production of
subjectivity through claims to liberate the psyche” (32). Tony cannot live
in the contradiction surrounding his “freedom”: that he has both a “des-
tiny” and the capacity to alter it if he can learn and grow and show
personal courage to change. This moralism is at the heart of the Sopranos
melodrama and beyond any goal Puzo ever had for his mob families in
fiction or film.
       Death is Tony’s constant companion and counters his desire for
growth and change. In one session with Melfi, he’s concerned enough to
deflect his fears onto Anthony Jr. (A. J.) who’s become death-haunted from
reading Camus’s The Stranger at school and is quoting a philosopher he
calls “Nitch” (Nietzsche). Melfi tries to explain to Tony that his own symp-
toms (fainting, shortness of breath, panic attacks) are a physiological re-
sponse to emotional problems. She says that “when some people first
realize that people are solely responsible for their decisions, actions, and
beliefs, they can be overcome with intense dread, a dull aching anger that
the only absolute is death.” Tony then snaps the dialogue back to A. J.:
“[T]he kid may be onto something” (Sopranos 2, 7). When Christopher is
shot and almost killed by elements out to get at Tony, he tells Melfi dispar-
agingly that Christopher believes he has had a near-death experience and
saw himself in hell (Sopranos 2, 9). The pivotal dialogue continues:

Melfi:   Do you think he’ll go to hell?
Tony:    He’s not the type who deserves hell.
Melfi:   Who deserves it?
Tony:    The worst people. The twisted and demented psychos who kill
         people for pleasure, the cannibals, the degenerate bastards that
         molest and torture little kids and kill babies, the Hitlers, the Pol
         Pots, those are evil fucks that deserve to die.
Melfi:   What about you?
Tony:    Me? Hell? You were listening to me? We’re soldiers. Soldiers
         don’t go to hell. It’s war. Soldiers, they kill other soldiers. We’re
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                  267



         in a situation where everybody involved knows the stakes. And
         if you’re gonna accept those stakes, you gotta do certain things.
         It’s business. We’re soldiers. We follow codes. Orders.
Melfi:   Does that justify everything you do?
Tony:    Excuse me. Let me tell you something. When America opened
         the floodgates and let all the Italians in, we weren’t educated like
         the Americans. What’dya think they were doing it for? Because
         they wanted to save us all from poverty? No, they did it because
         they needed us. They needed us to build their cities and to dig
         their subways and to make them richer. The Carnegies and the
         Rockefellers. They needed their worker bees and there we were.
         But some of us didn’t want to swarm around their hive and lose
         who we were. We wanted to stay Italian and preserve the things
         that mean something to us. Honor and family and loyalty. And
         some of us wanted a piece of the action. Now we weren’t edu-
         cated like the Americans. But we had the balls to take what we
         wanted. But those other fucks, those other—the J. P. Morgans,
         they were crooks and killers, too. But that was business, right?
         The American Way?
Melfi:   What do poor Italian immigrants have to do with you? And
         what happens every morning you step out of bed?

      Melfi asking “what happens every morning you step out of bed?”
is the most direct and succinct challenge to mob narrative within the
genre since Puzo began asking his audiences to justify the Corleone praxis
by checking their morals at the first page or opening cinema frame. Her
question also signifies an all-American response to Tony’s taking refuge
within an identity politics to explain his life. The dialogue carefully de-
lineates the differing responses. First, Tony posits circles of hell like a
good moral theologian and sees himself and Christopher exempt because
they’re in a war, an endeavor that is structured and ritualized, unlike
degeneracy and appetite. He conflates capitalism and warfare (“It’s busi-
ness. We’re soldiers”) and models both immigrant identity and essential
American criminality. He can’t help showing his hypocrisy in a further
rhetorical conflation (honor and a piece of the action). Melfi doesn’t buy
it. The speech sounds as if he has memorized it as a catechism from his
father or other mob members or extrapolated it from Godfather narrative.
She calls Tony on his ethnic affiliation; after all, he’s third-generation
Italian American. Then she asks about practice: what, indeed, does Tony
do every day? How can he find justification in an ethnicity to commit the
acts he commits? What does being Italian American in 2000 have to do
with historical wrongs suffered by his people?12
      Essentially this is a majoritarian question from the heart of a more
universalized American doxa that says that any essentialism is not an
adequate justification for socially deviant conduct. It’s made all the more
268                              Chapter 9



authentic because the question is asked by an Italian American female
psychiatrist, thus conjoining her own valid ethnicity and female senti-
ment against violence, as well as a scientific, humanistic legitimacy as a
medical professional. In blunter terms, she won’t allow Tony to play the
ethnic card and tells him that his life is about him now, every day. In
American dialogues other than The Sopranos, Melfi’s negative response
could be used to block African American grievances at their historical
and racial root in favor of a universal “Americanness” or to counter
views on affirmative action. Melfi speaks in a backlash against identity
politics as a cultural universalist, qualifying historical trauma and center-
ing on the mythical and nonidentity-inflected monadic American who
communes with conscience as sole arbiter of conduct and does not allow
any multiple cause and effect, a line of argument that could date back
past Hawthorne’s conscience-haunted characters to real Puritan fathers.
In mutated form, her critique of Tony is mainstream and comforting.
Tony and his men have every reason to fear hell, but The Sopranos can’t
help both parodying and contextualizing that fear. Chase and his stable
of writers maintain an archness about what is deeply troubling in Ameri-
can allegiances and trangressions, while not denying the trauma and
perhaps helping audiences to recognize it. They do so through a relativ-
ism that contextualizes all previous absolutes in the signature that under-
writes the postmodern response.
      Chase won’t let Tony and Melfi’s confrontation end there. Tony is
outraged at her questions, which treacherously strip away all his con-
structed defenses. Like a wounded child, he howls at her, “You pick
now to act like Betsy fucking Ross!”—and this after telling him he was
the victim of poor parenting! Tony is instinctively correct to hurl the
“Betsy Ross” charge at Melfi, a female who criticizes his Italian Ameri-
can identity defense from the standpoint of an angry American patrio-
tism. She suddenly speaks authoritatively in a mainstream American
historical indictment of Tony’s life after positing his mother as the prob-
able cause of his dread. But now she kicks the crutch of the evil mother
away from him, leaving him nowhere to stand as victim, certainly not
in the turn-of-the-millennium’s favorite jargon of excuse, “poor
parenting.” Still so very far from acknowledging his own guilt, he can,
however, in perfect contemporary fashion, retreat into his status as
“victim.” Tony knows what his rights are (he watches Sally Jessy, too,
after all), and they don’t include being called to account for his actions.
Here is a clear example of what a deft comedy of manners The Sopranos
often is. Not once does Chase ambiguously question the seriousness of
Melfi and Tony’s dialogue but wryly depicts Tony perhaps more
infantilized by her criticism than he was before getting hooked by the
“helping” professions. Still thinking about being betrayed, he goes home
to an argument with Carmela, where he projects his anger both at his
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                 269



mother and Melfi onto her earlier bitter suggestion to him that he get
a vasectomy if he is going to continue to sleep with other women.
When Tony asks her, “Isn’t it a sin to undo the good work [God] has
done?” he thinks he’s made a telling point through her religious faith,
that he shouldn’t be “snipped,” but Carmela comes back with, “Well,
you should know. You’ve made a living of it.” In a single morning, mob
boss Tony Soprano has now been accused of being a murderer by both
his shrink and his wife in the most stunning moral colloquy in the
history of mob narrative, surpassing anything Connie and Kay could
wound Michael with in The Godfather.
      Angry and frustrated, Tony then badly wounds A. J. by suggesting
that his “son and heir” would have been better off not born. The “sins
of the mother” are visited by the son onto the grandson. Inside the nomi-
nally powerful mob boss is a very unhappy child acting “like a woman”
in his hysteria and by fainting, and those in his orbit, particularly women
and children, immediately pay for it. The Tony Soprano reclamation project
would be to turn him into a faithful husband, a better father, and a
reconciled son, but it’s not easy, especially when Melfi’s question about
what happens when Tony steps out of bed every morning is set along-
side the show’s popular opening theme with its refrain, “Woke up this
morning/Got yourself a gun” softly thumping through the opening credits
as Tony drives home through northern New Jersey. Basically, Tony arises
for work (sometimes quite late in the morning), and that work poten-
tially always includes a gun. Other accents filter through this connection
of waking and guns. If three decades after The Godfather we get the mob
story we need, it’s in an America much more hypersensitive about both
identity defenses and violence than Puzo’s was, while its own popular
cultural production is more and more violent (the same would obviously
apply to The Sopranos itself, constantly working though and questioning
what the show itself is afflicted with and presents), the American culture’s
obsession with guns and their relation to violence. “Woke Up This Morn-
ing” and its less-than-subliminal vigilante message is inescapable. The
song’s second line states that your “father always told you, you’re the
chosen one,” and such a role is precisely what Tony cannot inhabit any
longer and why he is in crisis. Tony remains a passionate primitive and
pilgrim who would like to awaken in the sadness of a fallen morning
and have all things be well, but that would be giving up his gun in a
dangerous world where what he and Melfi talk about “don’t go down.”
But they have talked about it in therapy with the full participation of a
contemporary cable television audience, which by now knows that no
subject is currently blanketed in omerta. The analyst-analysand transac-
tion is always in the mode of Romance of Consciousness, which in con-
temporary representation may allow for the sympathizing identification
with anyone about anything.
270                               Chapter 9



                     Jennifer Melfi:
          Psychoanalysis as Recovery Narrative


      Dr. Jennifer Melfi is a forty-something Italian American psychiatrist
who is the most powerful voice from the bourgeois public sphere yet
created to question the rationale and moral underpinnings of mob nar-
rative. She comes with impeccable credentials as insider and rightful
inquisitor and as the mother/daughter/lover/wife typically silenced in
this violent male narrative.13 She inhabits the ethnic Italian American role
used by Tony as refuge and justification, yet she represents almost total
assimilation through professional credentialing and scientific-cultural
capital. Her identities are multiple and intertextual. Thus while Tony in
an initial bonding gesture asks Melfi, “what part of the boot [Italy] you
from?” by Bourdieu’s markers, they speak across a wide gulf of accrued
cultural capital. Melfi is the liberal professional therapist of feeling who
probes the wounded male’s spirit in melodrama. As a professional
“reader” of patients as texts, she asks Tony society’s questions. The Sopra-
nos casts Melfi seriously as a romantic heroine of power and moral au-
thority. She appears in a long line of contemporary female interrogators
and representatives of the helping professions, in fiction and cinema, Pat
Conroy’s Dr. Lowenstein in The Prince of Tides; on television from Dr.
Joyce Brothers through Dr. Ruth, to Oprah, as well as the female profes-
sional authorities in books and self-help seminars (Suze Ormann, Naomi
Wolff, Marianne Williamson). Melfi is thus a familiar compound charac-
ter in an era of postfeminist authority. Brooks comments that “melo-
drama demonstrates over and over that the signs of ethical forces can be
discovered and can be made legible” (Landy 64) and in Melfi’s question-
ing, she certainly represents the professional middle-class audience caught
in the thrall of Tony’s violent life. She is fascinated, appalled, judgmental,
and without real answers for or about him. In thirty eight hours over
three seasons, Tony has broken down her belief in herself and her sci-
ence. Melfi wants to demonstrate to Tony and prove through him not the
existence of evil but his place in it and its roots in him, but as she tells
her own therapist, “I’m in a moral never-never land with this patient,”
precisely the uneasy situation of the audience for The Sopranos as it has
been for decades of Godfather audiences: how to balance Tony’s deeds
with his justifications for them, how to acknowledge his obvious heroism
on behalf of those he loves and for whom he feels responsible despite the
carnage he commits against others; how to root for a fledgling mob boss
who is undeniably a murderer.
      Melfi does not want to dislodge Tony from his place in the Soprano
family. She represents in the guise of science, modernity’s highest author-
ity, an “understanding” of sin and guilt. She wants to change Tony’s life
by smoothing him out and making him confront awake the dreams that
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                  271



haunt him. In effect, analyst and patient come to their dialogues in The
Sopranos representing epic’s fall into the novel as articulated by Lukacs.
Along with his identity as heroic Italian immigrant, Tony speaks for
traditional norms, what he calls “codes,” “rules” followed by “soldiers,”
but he is arrested in childhood; he is “childlike,” as both Lukacs and
Adorno have characterized both the epic form and hero. According to
Lukacs, the epic and by extension the epic hero must take vengeance
against those who trangress stable norms and strive for a “perfect
theodicy” in which crime and punishment always balance out (Lukacs
61). Tony knows who the really bad guys are, like Hitler and Pol Pot, not
him. In his traditional epic conception, Tony is vindicated in his own
mind when he himself metes out justice, almost as a god[father], cer-
tainly as judge, jury, and executioner. Melfi, on the other hand, strives to
acquaint Tony with “the psychology of the novel’s heroes” (60), as Lukacs
would say. Her discourse strips Tony of his power and makes him a
seeker after his own truth, quite a reduction in rank for an epic hero and
one that he sees as unmanning him, particularly when he already feels
threatened just by talking about it. During their therapy sessions, they
speak at cross purposes. On a more literary plane, Tony basically ex-
plains the world of epic heroism to Melfi, while she explains to him the
proper psychological role of the hero in a modernist novel. The two
discourses are incompatible and clash on a fault line of intent as well as
genre. The epic itself “inadvertently” becomes the novelistic, and both
are worked through in a family television melodrama, one of the most
hybridized popular forms in postmodernism.
      Beyond the obvious languages of sex-as-science and family romance
that punctuate psychoanalysis, the gulf that separates Tony and Melfi in
their dialogue on the morality of his role can also be seen in a class
analysis of their sessions. Tony always dresses informally; for him, a golf
shirt is work attire. Watching him shuffle heavily around his house in
underwear and an oversized bathrobe makes us remember how formal
and dignified the Corleone family appeared in the Godfather films. (Only
Sonny Corleone with his undershirt and suspenders combination, hair-
trigger temper, obscene language, and simmering sexuality could audi-
tion for the Soprano gang.) On no one’s schedule but his own, Tony is a
large temporarily domestic animal, padding around between feedings
and kills. His negative reaction to analysis is most often a class reaction
(I work for my family; I put food on the table; I do what my father did).
Bourdieu writes that “there is a popular realism which inclines working
people to reduce practices to the reality of their function, to do what they
do, and be what they are (‘That’s the way I am’), without ‘kidding them-
selves’ (‘That’s the way it is’)” (Distinction 200).14 The iron-clad tautolo-
gies that Tony himself practices make him resist Melfi’s attempts to
extrapolate and to symbolize, to draw out lines of intent—in short to
make him an elite reader of his own text. As Barthes writes of tautology,
272                              Chapter 9



Tony demands “the indignant ‘representation’ of the rights [italics Barthes]
of reality over and above language,” a refuge behind “the argument of
authority” (Mythologies 152–53). In this regard Tony practices a great
mistrust of therapy with which a popular audience can identify, espe-
cially in an era when traditional psychiatric therapy is questioned by a
number of insurgent discourses, especially feminist ones, and when drugs
buttress or supplant talking cures; indeed, Tony’s dosage of Prozac and
Xanax becomes a plot device. The Sopranos wants to have it all ways, to
portray the contemporary reliance on mood-suppressing drugs and yet
retain the romance of the analyst-analysand and allow Tony to voice
the general mass mistrust of analysis. Despite Melfi’s work with him,
Tony continues to practice what Bourdieu calls “the practical material-
ism which inclines [him] to censor the expression of feelings or to direct
emotion into violence or oaths” (199), a definition of maleness that
succinctly describes bottom-line Soprano family conduct in business
and in mob narrative.
      Every Freudian analysis is an attempt at an elite literary reading,
and Jennifer Melfi is Tony’s critical guide, bringing him before the bar of
his own history. Melfi wants to instruct Tony in how to make his life
mean something other than what he thinks it means. She introduces him
to allegory and symbolism and tries to push him beyond “I am what I
am” and “it is is what it is.” She is nothing less than the woman (mother,
lover, wife, “Betsy fucking Ross”) who will nurture, absolve, and en-
lighten him, so he may be released from the prison house of depression
and dread, a fairy tale from the Freudian century with lady analyst as
heroic knight. She stays the course of his therapy, fascinated, appalled,
compelled to listen but reeling, as is the audience. His revelations are the
stuff of her professional life, but they are extreme; his fury and impact
buckle her white magic. Tony has contaminated her sense of profession-
alism and sharpened her sense of justice. She’s finally face-to-face with
what she has to tease out in more muted form with other patients, what
could only be called the “problem of evil.” Violence enters Melfi’s per-
sonal life in The Soprano’s third season when she is brutally raped in a
parking garage. The police botch the investigation, and Chase toys with
the audience’s umbrage and anticipation: when will Tony learn of the
outrage and take vengeance since he believes “degenerate bastards that
molest” “deserve hell”? However, Melfi refuses to inform him. Her dra-
matic and wordless decision underscores her principled dismay at his
brutality, which she courageously will not allow to be invoked on her
behalf, no matter how angry and violated she feels. She will not become
part of the cycle.
      The questions finally posed by Melfi’s prolonged exposure to Tony
Soprano are: if she is beginning to crack under the enervating strain of
Tony’s life and rationale and her inability to change either, what does this
say about audience exposure to Tony and all the other Tonys? What are
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                  273



Tony’s conclusions about his life in analysis? If Melfi is able to “help”
Tony through therapy, will she inevitably weaken him in his role to the
point that his life will be in danger: to combat his evil, will she get him
killed?15 Finally, what is Chase’s melodrama telling us about our identi-
fication with Tony as it orchestrates these questions? Is The Sopranos a
serious moral investigation of mob narrative, or is that investigation only
another of its strands to be pasted into postmodern collage—and how
might we know the difference?


    In Carm’s Way: Carmela Soprano and Religion
               as Recovery Narrative

      Just as Melfi fervently practices the twentieth-century religion of
psychoanalysis, Carmela Soprano invokes the more traditional Catholic
faith. Carmela is filled with dread at the life the family has chosen and
hopes to make Tony, in her words, “true” to himself and to her. Taken
together, Melfi and Carm practice on Tony two healing discourses of the
spirit, the twentieth century’s scientific talking cure and the traditional
Christian religious discourse of repentance and absolution. They reinsti-
tute both female sympathy and sentimental extension of grace to him, or
at least the “normality” that Fisher prizes as sentiment’s conferral on
characters. Even though Tony spends no time in church except once to
point out to his daughter, Meadow, that his grandfather, a stone mason,
helped build it, Carmela tries to make up for his lapses and sins, since
to her, her souls and those of her children hang in the balance.16 Chase
in The Sopranos clearly wants to restore a religious dimension to the dread
expressed by a mob family member and fittingly chooses Carmela to
express that dread. It’s quite radical to find a genuinely religious charac-
ter on a prime-time television program who is not in the clergy or who
is not some sort of fantasy figure, such as characters in Touched by an
Angel, or much more trendily expressing belief, disbelief, and interest in
the “paranormal,” in series from The X-Files to Buffy the Vampire Slayer.
If Jennifer Melfi ethnicizes and feminizes psychiatry, Carmela Soprano
retains the religious vision for a wife and mother in realism. Together
these two sopranos sing to and for Tony, as they try to bring him out of
his narcissistic and depressed male uniqueness and into the flow of a
relational existence, postmodern culture’s feminine desideratum for a
reformed male.
      Episode nine of The Sopranos’ second season contains the long dia-
logue between Tony and Melfi about who deserves to go to hell and
Tony’s justification of mob life, as well as several scenes in which char-
acters seek to learn their relation to sin and evil. The Sopranos hardly ever
moralizes or snickers, and when it does, the narrative generally bites
back. In the tradition of TV melodrama’s balance, it gets out the conflicting
274                              Chapter 9



points of view. Christopher is in intensive care after stopping several
bullets and believes he’s been to hell and returned to tell the tale. Hell
turns out to be an Irish bar called the “Emerald Piper” where it’s always
St. Patrick’s Day, and Christopher is playing dice with Roman soldiers
and two Irish guys, and the Irish always win. Every night at midnight,
Christopher’s murdered father “gets whacked” again, and “it’s painful,”
Christopher moans to Tony, as he asks for an increased morphine drip.
He then tells Tony and Paulie that he has messages for them from guys
they’d murdered. Paulie listens nervously and actually consults a psy-
chic on his chances of staying out of hell and his prostitute girlfriend
weighs in on predestination as well. Tony is moved to give his version
of who belongs in hell to Melfi (see pages 266–67). However, he’s gener-
ally exasperated by Christopher’s visions. He prefers a more utilitarian
approach to religion. Earlier, he had laid down the parental theological
law to Anthony Jr.’s “Nitch”-inspired view that “God is dead” by telling
him that “even if God is dead, you’re going to kiss his ass.” The Sopranos
is never too haughty to opt for such telling one-liners. The verbal spar-
ring at home is vintage television family banter, light years from omerta
or any patriarchal hierarchy. The Sopranos also has the confidence that
Christopher’s trip to hell and back will be truly comic as well as very
revealing for all the murdering men in their scuffling with conscience.
Mixed modes rule yet again in the postmodern mob narrative.
      When Carmela reaches the hospital to visit Christopher, her first
reaction is to find an empty room in which to pray:

      Gentle and merciful lord Jesus. I want to speak to you now
      with an open heart, an honest heart. Take my sins and the sins
      of my family into your merciful heart. We have chosen this life
      in full awareness of the consequences of our sins. I ask you
      humbly to spare him and if it is your will to spare him, deliver
      him from blindness and grant him vision and through this
      vision may he see your love and gain the strength to carry on
      in service to your mercy.

Flushed with her prayers, Carmela goes to Christopher’s room after the
men leave to tell him of her hopes for him. Tony has given her a deeply
altered version of Christopher’s big journey, telling her that he had seen
angels in heaven, but Christopher immediately corrects the vision. Al-
though actress Edie Falco’s deft facial expressions reveal Carmela’s con-
cern as she absorbs Christopher’s story of his trip to hell, she does not
swerve from her course. Without missing a beat, she corrects her vision
of heaven to include his hell trip and still prays for his salvation; she’s
used to incorporating extremity into her prayers. Chase counters Carmela’s
overtures to Christopher with the facts but does not overturn either. Her
sincere attempt to reach out with traditional balm and comfort becomes
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                    275



another competing discourse in the Soprano dialogues on good and evil.
Neither her view nor Christopher’s comic rendition of hell by an Italian
American mob kid and murderer takes precedence as a narrative strand,
forcing the popular audience to live this contradiction as she does.
      Carmela is the mistress of a huge suburban house. Although she
keeps refrigerator and freezer filled with baked Italian treats for when
the family wanders in from school or predatory acts and skulduggery,
their shiny home is void of ethnic ensemble warmth or closeness. The
internal distances in the house are huge and empty, accentuated by the
way Chase typically shoots the home scenes in long focus. The family is
forever walking down stairways and entering doors into large brightly
lit rooms dominated by a long sterile kitchen counter or a huge TV set
or king-size bed. Food or conversation is doled out in raids on the fridge
late at night or in midday when Tony finally wakes up. Tony and A. J.
meet at the TV set or looking for food. The Sopranos are often at home
together, but vast spaces separate them. To counter her loneliness, Carmela
often reaches out to a young priest, but he is as much a movie buff and
a childlike flirt as he is a dispenser of spiritual comfort. When Tony takes
Meadow on a college tour in New England, Father Phil shows up late on
a rainy night at the Soprano house for a half parish visit and half seduc-
tion. Even though Carmela is flu-ridden, she comes to the door in her
bathrobe and slippers and offers him the baked ziti in the freezer in
familiar ethnic ritual. He then asks about Tony and the kids, and they
settle in to watch The Remains of the Day, a favorite film of hers. When the
film reaches the unmasking of Stevens the butler as a reader of popular
romances, he is literally backed against the wall, shielding himself with
his novel from an advancing Miss Kenton, who wishes to break through
his defenses and achieve some intimacy; his cold, bright eyes keep her
away as if he is a hunted animal. The absolute lack of communication
between them and Miss Kenton’s agonizing unrequited love is too much
for Carmela. She says, “Father, turn it off. I can’t handle it. There’s so much
in me.” Rather than be pulled into some transgressive situation at this
point, she requests a confession, right there on the living room couch. They
turn their backs to one another, and she begins:

     I haven’t confessed in twenty years. I have forsaken what is
     right for what is easy, allowing what I know is evil in my house.
     I wanted money in my hands, I’m so ashamed. My husband, I
     think he has committed horrible acts. . . . It’s just a matter of
     time before God compensates me for my sins. . . . But I still love
     him. I still believe he can be a good man.

Carmela in effect confesses for the audience as well and expresses the
viewers’ shared hopes that Tony can be redeemed. The viewpoint most
strongly expressed is the sentimental one of Christian forgiveness cloaked
276                             Chapter 9



in the more contemporary “forgive thyself” of analysis. Both discourses
are articulated by the women who together hold Tony’s moral balance
(and that of the audience) in their hands. Jennifer Melfi provides the most
trenchant questioning of Tony Soprano from behind the authority of psy-
chiatric categories, but Carmela assumes the more traditional woman’s
role, familiar from The Godfather, of praying for souls.
      However, Chase provides Carmela with the power to counter Tony’s
actions in other ways beyond prayer. Carmela is a tough in-fighter when
she must be. When she finds out about Melfi, that Tony’s seeing a female
therapist, she tells him about her movie night with Father Phil and calls
it “just therapy.” She’s also not a Pollyanna, not immune from the coer-
cive life the Soprano crime family lives. When she wants to make sure
that her daughter, Meadow, is accepted at Georgetown, she bakes her
best pasta dish, takes it to a lady lawyer acquaintance, and never waivers
in her sweet steely determination to get the message across: that a letter
of recommendation would make Carmela, a Soprano after all, very
happy.17 She almost has an affair with a home contractor who is scared
off by Tony’s reputation. When Tony explains he’s been talking his Rus-
sian girlfriend out of suicide, Carmela informs him that she’s going to
take a three-week trip to Rome and perhaps meet “the Holy Father,” and
Tony will have to drive A. J. to the dentist and find a tennis clinic for
Meadow “cause if I have to do it, I may just commit suicide.” She insists
that Tony get a vasectomy if he continues to whore around; she won’t
accept the idea of contracting disease or of bastard children. At the end
of episode nine, having prayed for Christopher and come almost to the
end of her tolerance for Tony’s lies and violence, she yet attempts to bind
them together by taking him into their bed and whispering that she
wants another child; they sink down together for the first time in twenty-
two episodes over two seasons! The last shot cuts away to a pair of small
carved angels on the nightstand by the bed with their eyes uplifted.
Carm’s way finally carries a day. Such a provisional happy ending is rare
in The Sopranos but points to how many of the episodes end with Tony
safe in the home, often befuddled or lonely, away from his “business.”
      Thus psychiatry and religion are asked to rehabilitate Tony Soprano
in what is surely a male recovery narrative for our time. Tony asks Melfi
if what he does and is has any meaning (an existential and individual
quest), while Carmela asks him to be “true” to her and to his children (a
social role in the life-world of a marriage and family).18 Women in The
Sopranos powerfully counter the reigning ethos of the mob family and
demand that the men acknowledge their natures and try to change, what
the contemporary American culture says in general to men and another
example of a popular narrative speaking in code and working through
a cultural syndrome in the affirmative. The Godfather, which always seems
in need of reflection and analysis by its characters or authorial voice,
                    The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                 277



never doubted its own motives, values, or ability of its men to act. In
contrast, The Sopranos brings the mob narrative to a pitch of contempo-
rary bourgeois maturity and postmodern comedy of manners with Tony’s
resulting indecision and doubt. Melfi and Carmela are no mere spokes-
women and mouthpieces, either. They often reverse roles as increasingly,
Melfi plumbs the nature of evil, while Carm lauds therapy; in fact, she
feels initially (before learning Melfi’s identity) that Tony is being very
brave. She’s elated that he embarks on a course to help himself.
      Chase can create his episodes in the certainty that male authority is
provisionally under severe erasure in 1999–2001, that any male action
may be interpreted as violent, abusive, and isolated. This current popular
narrative moral plot line clashes with another, more traditional one, what
The Sopranos provides in the best tradition of mob narrative, the still
operating sense of unreconstructed male action—direct, nonreflective,
closed to wives and family. Men giving off that whiff of danger in their
very presence. Men not reconstructed by new discourses or “authentic”
to themselves but menacing and visceral.19 The complex satisfaction for
the viewer of The Sopranos is where the most excessive clashes occur
between the overcoded male or what is left of him and the sopranos,
Melfi and Carmela, who sing of balm, understanding, and the acceptance
of the sorrow that underlies Tony’s rage and depression. Tony mourns
for what he has lost or perhaps never had, a youthful integrity of
“epicness” without reflection, to be coextensive with one’s physical self
and desires; these desires he cloaks in ethnic identity. Psychiatry and
religion would draw Tony away from this nostalgia to perfect another
Utopian and reflective male self for the future; a naive American thera-
peutic optimism would reign there. Such a persona is incompatible with
the strong father and boss of mob narrative we have come to know and
accounts for the fierce oxymoronic and dramatic tension that Chase is
able to sustain in The Sopranos and which creates a schism in Tony’s
psyche with no reconciliation in sight.


                           Livia Soprano

       Tony’s mother, Livia Soprano, is the most powerful figure in Tony’s
life. She looms over his childhood as a furious and loveless source of
potential violence and manipulation. She reigns over his adulthood as a
bitter older woman and widow who mightily resents both her decreased
authority after the death of her husband, “Johnny Boy” Soprano, and the
onslaught of old age. Tony says she “is dead” to him; her daughter,
Janice, calls her “a complete narcissist”; her granddaughter, Meadow, in
more contemporary jargon says that “Gramma is into negativity.” Dr.
Melfi suggests that in the Soprano family, “the whole idea of motherhood
278                               Chapter 9



is up for debate” (Sopranos 2, 7]. Livia is also the series’ hardest character
to gauge. She alternately appears shrewd and dangerous and then dis-
solves into incipient senility; the changes often appear strategic but just
as often out of her control. And yet the viewer never knows. Janice
brings up the children’s painful childhood, and Livia says, “You don’t
know the kind of man your father was. It would kill him to see me now”
(Sopranos 2, 2). In two quick sentences, Livia (played by the late Nancy
Marchand) reveals all her inscrutability. Marchand reads the first sen-
tence (“You don’t know) ominously as in “your father would have had
the power to slap you down for what you say”; she follows it up with
“It would kill him” read in a wail of utter self-pity and weakness. Then
she pronounces a double curse on her daughter: “[S]ome day I hope you
have children of your own and they treat you like this.”
       During analysis, Melfi encourages Tony to think back to childhood,
to see if he can recall his mother literally threatening his life. He easily
remembers several episodes. One has young mother Livia threatening
little Tony, “You’re driving me crazy. I could stick this fork in your eye.”20
Another shows Johnny Boy Soprano wanting to move the family west to
Reno, so he can get a stake in gambling opportunities there, but Livia
shouts him down, her children within earshot: “I’d rather smother them
with a pillow than take them to Nevada.” Johnny Boy’s retort, “[A]lways
with the drama!” signifies the fact that Livia’s powerful histrionics were
always in the melodramatic mode. Tony had good family coaching in
melodrama, and in the final episode of The Sopranos’ first season, viewers
were treated to the extraordinary sight of Tony rushing to the hospital to
confront Livia after learning that she had set him up to be “hit,” only to
find her being wheeled into intensive care for a possible stroke. He al-
most leaps onto her gurney, getting in her face, eyes wild as he demands,
“[D]id you have me whacked?” Livia’s eyes too get wilder, bigger, as
horrified nurses and orderlies try to pull son off mother. A thin smile
crosses Livia’s face as she disappears through a hospital door, but it’s
unclear whether her smile is one of terror, triumph, or bewilderment.
With Livia Soprano, Chase has both restored the power of the Italian
American mother and cruelly darkened her portrait. The Italian Ameri-
can mother was an absent center of power in The Godfather, where her
role was usurped by Don Corleone. Chase gestures toward Puzo’s ad-
mission that he modeled the Don on his own mother when Tony ruefully
acknowledges to Livia after she has stonewalled him once again, “Ma,
if you’d been born after those feminists, you’d be the real gangster”
(Sopranos 1, 7).
       Indeed, what Chase has done is create in Livia all the malevolence
and maternal refusal to be displaced from the center of her son’s life that
Lucia Santa exhibited toward Gino in The Fortunate Pilgrim without giv-
ing Livia any of Puzo’s sympathy and veneration for that fierce love.21 In
The Fortunate Pilgrim, Lucia Santa asked Octavia, “Who should be [Gino’s]
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                 279



boss if not his mother? . . . What will happen to him when he finds out
what life is, how hard it is? He expects too much, he enjoys life too
much” (223) and, even more tellingly, “[H]e was her enemy as his father
before him . . . he treated her as a stranger, he never respected her com-
mands. He injured her and the family name” (226). Finally, Lucia Santa
cried “tears so full of gall that they could only have sprung from a well
of anger, not grief” (223).
      Livia Soprano turns this powerful Italian American mother’s cour-
age rancid since she has no love to temper her bitterness. It’s bad enough
that Livia has lost her aura of power with the death of her husband, but
she can’t even gain any pathetic capital in her fall from mob boss’s clearly
miserable wife to unloveable, unloving mother. Livia is jealous of her son
and his strong wife, and she’s threatened by the idea Tony’s disclosing
to a psychiatrist all her shortcomings as a mother. Livia takes Puzo’s cry
about his mother (“Behold how she was wronged!”) and twists it to:
Behold how I’ve been wronged by everyone!
      Puzo concludes The Fortunate Pilgrim by moving Lucia Santa to a
new home on Long Island, where the whole family lives in a Raisin in the
Sun migration. In contrast, Chase has Livia Soprano ensconced in a fancy
retirement home, raging in impotent fury as a senior citizen about to be
warehoused toward death. Nothing any longer belongs to Livia that would
allow her to work her will or feel special. Only the link with her brother-
in-law, Junior, from her own generation keeps her pride and memories
alive, and together they fan the fire of their mutual resentment of Tony’s
presumptions to be an adult and boss of the Soprano family. She feels she
has lost her family—something Mama Corleone told Michael was impos-
sible. Tony feels the terror that Santa Lucia’s son, Gino, felt about his
mother in The Fortunate Pilgrim: that he would forever have to “chain
himself in the known, lightless world he had been born in” (265), a vision
of womblike imprisonment in the Italian American life-world.
      The attachment of an Italian son to his mother can be impossibly
strong, an emotionally intense but not destructive bond (as in Greek
tragedy) and most often represented through comedy. Many Italian men
live well into their twenties and thirties still being cared for by mothers
who never truly let them go.22 However, this cultural characteristic be-
comes grotesque antinurture in a battle to the death between Tony and
Livia, especially after Johnny Boy dies and Tony tentatively takes his
place as head of the Soprano Family. No small gesture of Tony’s is ever
appreciated by Livia. When he brings her favorite cookies to the senior
citizen home, she refuses to eat them, telling him “to leave some out for
the lunatics.” When she comes to a Soprano family barbecue, she sniffs
the air and makes a face, saying, “You’re cooking with mesquite. It ruins
the taste.” Her dinner table conversation is peppered with references to
family atrocities, particularly mothers killing their babies. When A. J.
visits his grandmother and says he’s depressed, she replies that “the
280                              Chapter 9



world is a jungle . . . people let you down. In the end you die in your
own arms. It’s all a big nothing. What makes you think you’re so spe-
cial?” (2, 7). The Sopranos gives Livia no space or sympathy. She has no
protection from her accusing son and no influence over him, and that
double negation drives her toward madness and violence, even as age
and illness close the circle of darkness.23
       Every psychoanalysis not only picks up on the role in which the
patient casts his mother but, in effect, becomes the patient’s new gesta-
tion period in which he spends a period of time learning and trying out
new feelings, to be reborn into his own narrative. Thus, Tony’s sessions
with Melfi are not only about the mother-son relationship but are in-
tended to replace that relationship with a stronger one. That Livia may
be replaced or doubled by Melfi in the dynamics with Tony is exempli-
fied by her becoming more and more impatient with him in their ses-
sions, by her drinking and becoming scattered, in effect, by her repeatedly
asking him the question Livia asks of the men in her family: “[W]hat
makes you so special”?
       In essence, Tony confesses to one woman (Melfi) the sins of another
woman (his mother, Livia), while keeping the transaction essentially quiet
from a third woman (his wife, Carmela). He wants the sympathy, pity,
and ego support he should have received from his mother and gets it on
a weekly basis from Melfi. That he also frequents his Russian girlfriend
with “appointments” and that he puts Melfi on the run from his enemies,
forcing her to ply her profession out of a motel, adds to the illicit quality
of her role and the sense that the extension of Tony’s fixation with his
mother is reshaping all the roles of the women in his life as they mutate
into his mother. Even his daughter, Meadow, his most clear-eyed sup-
porter, is in thrall to Livia. In the sudden ending of the third episode in
year two, Tony goes to check on his mother’s empty house (his child-
hood home). He peeks in the window and sees Meadow. Nights before
she and her teenage friends made a mess carousing there without per-
mission, and now, bandanna on her head, Meadow is on her knees,
sobbing, nauseous, almost manically scrubbing the floor clean in an
obeisance and penance that her father never approaches and cannot
understand; it’s between grandmother and grandaughter, and Tony is
excluded; he backs away in confused silence and never mentions that he
saw her.
       Tony’s older sister, Janice, is another tormented female Soprano.
She suddenly reappears in the family’s life after two decades away. A
recycled new ager/hippie with the commune name Parvati Wasatch, she’s
also a manipulator like her mother with a sharp eye for playing off one
family member against the other in order to get a stake. When she takes
up with Richie Aprile, a recently released ex-convict, the brother of Tony’s
former boss and a thorn in Tony’s side, the viewer wonders if Janice,
vital in middle age, has arrived to become a center of power equal to her
                      The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                    281



mother and a real challenger to Tony. However, that speculation ends in
one of The Sopranos’ most arbitrary and forced plot developments. In an
argument that turns violent, Richie slaps Janice’s face, and she simply
takes out a gun and shoots him dead. By the end of this penultimate
episode in year two, Janice is hustled out of town on a bus. Tony is left
to mop up after her, cleaning the blood from the same living room
Meadow had compulsively scrubbed, while Christopher and Furio make
Richie “disappear” by chopping up his body in a butcher shop. The
irony is that Tony himself had just ordered Richie’s execution, but, as
usual, someone, most often a female Soprano, acts for him. True to her
mother’s love/hate melodrama with men, Janice wails to an exasperated
Tony of Richie, “I loved him so.”24
       Janice’s role points to a real problem for women in The Sopranos.
None has any claim to a network of other women. Each major female
character is a satellite dancing around Tony, telling him his truth. They do
not come together to form a “family of sopranos.” Carmela has her circle
of suburban wife friends, but she has no intimates. She is essentially alone,
shunned by her daughter and resented by her mother-in-law, whom she
most often fights to a draw; she fears and mistrusts Melfi’s presence in
Tony’s life. Janice is an operator, alone in Richie’s volatile orbit until she
snaps. Tony and Janice’s sister lives near Tony but is seldom seen except
to make it clear she is purposely steering clear of their mother. Meadow
casts a cold eye on everyone and is willing to cut off friends if they criticize
her father. In the final scene of The Sopranos’ third season, however, she
walks away from her father in disgust, realizing that Tony has ordered the
hit on her gangster-wannabe boyfriend, Jackie Aprile, Jr. Christopher’s
girlfriend, Adrianna, has identified Carmela as her role model, but they
seldom see each other, and she has no one her own age. Melfi acts as a deus
ex machina, commenting on Tony’s family members.
       Melodrama always needs a strong enemy or antagonist, and yet in
its sympathetic need for audience identification it also needs strong he-
roes and heroines. In The Sopranos, Livia is the villain, while Melfi and
Carmela are the heroic protectors and defenders of Tony’s flame. No
father confers succession on Tony, and he suffers the loss of his mother
with almost Rousseauistic intensity. Tony becomes a male hysteric, faint-
ing, suffering shortness of breath, and feeling dread in a bid for love and
the pathos that should have surrounded the orderly separation of the son
from the maternal.25 In searching for that maternal imaginary through
Melfi and analysis, Tony also seeks it from the audience as does the
melodramatic form. Viewers mother Tony and excoriate Livia, while the
rest of Tony’s women—wife, shrink, mistress, sister, daughter—move to
fill Livia’s roles. Never before has a mob boss been in a position or need
to seek so much mothering from female characters and an audience. No
godfather in sight to hold it all together for Tony, nor is he capable of
becoming one.26
282                              Chapter 9



 The Form of Television Melodrama: HBO as Home


      Tony Soprano’s crisis is always personal, which deflects much worry
about his crimes in collective society. The farther away from his criminal
conduct and social roles as an active member of society or participant in
an American economy, the better the melodrama likes it. Such a reversal
of audience scrutiny from the material crimes of the mob boss toward his
intimate relations stamps Tony as always self-involved. However, it’s
instructive to look briefly at his economic status. Tony is light years away
from the status of a Corleone. It’s easy to see Tony as somewhat of a
struggling businessman, albeit one with rolls of cash tucked in his shirt.
Tony and the Soprano crime family nibble on the edges of a millennial
boom economy that has “legitimately” passed them by making others
instant millionaires and billionaires through a 1990’s stock market boom
and total emphasis on technology. In fact, Tony’s “businesses” are anti-
quated and piecemeal: protection, auto theft rings, hijacking truckloads
of merchandise (to poke through the contents), scams selling bogus phone
calling cards to lonely immigrants, attempts to establish backroom gam-
bling as an “executive” card game. Tony’s into a little bit of everything
but has labor and management worries everywhere.27 His new recruits
are moronically eager, his most trusted associate has been turned by the
FBI. He’s still an underboss with no sense of Corleone grandness. Tony
attends no major mob conventions to carve up the U.S. territory but
instead is usually pulling up to dump sites, loading docks, and forlorn
Meadowland vistas in his SUV, trying to ride herd on his impulsive
young lieutenants and collect the various monies due to him out of fear.
He’s not letting Uncle Junior and his wing of the family “earn” as Jackie
Aprile had done before his death. He suppresses incursions from other
racial and ethnic groups, as well as soundings from the postmodern
media and technology. Christopher wants to be a “player” in cinema and
market or create “himself.” Tony sets him up with a phony license in
fronting a small brokerage office, where “brokerage” connotes broken
bones of young traders if the Webistics stock doesn’t get sold. Tony’s
view that “things are trending downward” and that he’s “coming in at
the end” (1, 1) is confirmed. The Sopranos are more of a danger to their
immediate family and each other than they are a cancer on American
society; they toil in an unhealthy and dangerous occupation that is fad-
ing, such as coal mining. Tony’s problems become more those of a
midcareer executive facing obsolescence.
      The Soprano family is living out Cawelti’s obervation that the “es-
sential social-psychological dynamic of social melodrama is one of con-
tinually integrating new social circumstances to the developing middle
class sense of social value” (46). The question becomes then: what narra-
tives cannot be absorbed by the American middle class if the mob boss
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                   283



becomes just another tired, befuddled guy driving home to suburbia
every evening? Does murder become just another “social circumstance”
the audience will abide if other resemblances to themselves are strong
enough? If Tony drives an SUV and commutes to work with a cell phone
stuck to his ear and lives in a big suburban house and worries about his
employees and a dying occupation and cheers for his daughter playing
soccer, does he become one of us only? Or is he still a murdering mob
boss? It is clear from the first three seasons that one thrust of The Sopranos
is not to put Tony in prison but to rehabilitate him, help him “put it all
behind him”: the rage, the horrible mother, the enervating depression,
his killing, his evil ways. Melodrama’s Utopian hope and end point is
always to elevate its hero to this virtuous state, but given The Sopranos’
serial form and its great success, Tony’s rebirth is not likely to occur any
time soon.
       What is so central to The Sopranos is what has always been at the
core of melodrama: home. Home is where Tony arrives at the beginning
of each episode. The show is very centered on region, and no one has
captured the much-maligned New Jersey on film like The Sopranos. Over
the opening credits, Tony emerges from the Lincoln Tunnel into Jersey,
passes over the Garden State Parkway and the New Jersey Turnpike,
goes by smaller row houses, weedy lots, refineries, factories, and small
businesses; the roads become smaller, the houses, sleeker and farther
apart. Finally the last stretch takes him down a tree-lined road, and he
pulls up in his own driveway in North Caldwell, alighting from the car
with a final thrice-repeated “got yourself a gun” hammering on the
soundtrack. Dad is home. Tony’s drive also simulates the long march
(but short distance) earlier immigrants took from the now grim, older
factory towns in a new migration to a suburban frontier; Philip Roth had
the dynamic right decades ago in Goodbye, Columbus (1959) when his Neil
Klugman thinks that “it would not take an eagle to carry me up those
lousy one hundred and eighty feet that make summer nights so much
cooler in Short Hills than they are in Newark” (10). The Soprano crime
family still functions in the inner older Jersey cities; the Soprano nuclear
family nestles in an upper-middle-class suburb. The series has yet to
invade one turf with the other (except for a periodic FBI search warrant
visit), to suggest as boldly as Puzo and Coppola did in Godfather II that
Michael Corleone’s family fortress on Lake Tahoe could be invaded by
his business “life” and that his bedroom could be the site of an assassi-
nation attempt, the family place, as Michael rages at his lieutenants,
“where my wife sleeps!” and then softly, in still steely tones, “where my
children come and play with their toys.”
       To scale a putative godfather down to the small screen, Chase pro-
vides Tony with echoes of American television fathers from landmark TV
programs. Tony Soprano has the discontents, strong opinions, and gen-
erally conservative leanings of an Archie Bunker in All in the Family,
284                               Chapter 9



which began with a nostalgic “Those Were the Days” screeched by Edith
Bunker and sung by Archie as the camera rolled through a block of
modest homes on an older Queens street before pulling up in front of
Archie’s house, where he is indubitably “at home” in his famous battered
chair. The Simpsons’ opening features the whole family racing home from
different places as Homer leaves the nuclear power plant and careens
through Springfield’s environs before landing plopped down in front of
the TV with Marge and his brood, the credits for the program starting so
fast that it seems they’re watching The Simpsons.28 In reversing the open-
ing home image, the 1970s most honored and least ironic TV family
melodrama, The Waltons, ended in a large country house, the many fam-
ily members talking between the rooms, lovingly saying “goodnight” as
the lights went out one by one, including those of family chronicler “John
Boy” Walton.29 The mother and father of The Waltons were Olivia and
John, a very close fit to Livia and “Johnny Boy” Soprano in perhaps a
skewed homage by Chase.30 Without undertaking a close analysis of Tony
Soprano set against these famous TV fathers, it’s certain that Chase places
him in a long line and wide range of very referential figures that an
audience knows and appreciates—blustery, opinionated, comic, serious,
conservative, liberal, interested in children, wanting to do the right things,
occasionally absurd, always loved by the family. The economic function
of these fathers varies. Archie’s on the loading dock, Homer’s in the
nuclear power plant, John Walton’s in his backyard lumber business, and
Tony is in “Waste Management” (Chase’s pun)..31
      The fact that The Sopranos is on HBO allows speculation about the
class dynamics of the Soprano family’s televised representation and also
speaks to both melodrama and cable television’s altering of TV viewing
patterns and their analogies to movie going. Home Box Office is the most
exclusive American cable television service and reaches only about one-
quarter of American homes available to network broadcasts (Carter “HBO
Wants to Make Sure You Notice” 97). Since it is not included in “basic”
cable packages, HBO and its lauded original series are promoted and
screened to a more elite audience, viwers who can pay for cable and also
pay for an extra premium cable service. HBO viewers can choose from
a range of programs that allow for more artistic freedom than is usually
granted series television, in terms of both content and style: no checks on
obscene language or presentation of sex, no commercial breaks, and the
chance to run shows consecutively for, in the case of The Sopranos, thir-
teen weeks with no breaks for reruns or waiting for network “sweeps”
periods. The Sopranos also takes on the form of the great nineteenth-
century melodramas of writers such as Charles Dickens. A new chapter
appears in the serial every week, with action ranging over many facets
of the characters’ lives without picking up the narrative thread exactly
where the last chapter dropped it (every Dickens reader has the experi-
ence of going deeply into one of his characters for fifty pages at the
                    The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                 285



outset of a majestic melodrama such as Bleak House and then not having
that character reappear in the textured and cross-referenced plot until
around page 400). The Sopranos moves confidently in the guise of such a
long, unfolding Victorian novel. If you missed the flashback scene of
Tony’s youth with his young parents (1, 7), then you’ve missed a piece
of his puzzle. Yet HBO, because of the popularity of the series, runs each
Sopranos episode “in season” like a first-run movie, with a first presen-
tation of a new episode on Sunday night and the repeats of the same
episode in staggered hours on three or four other nights during that
week. You may “go to” The Sopranos in your home on the evening of
your choice and find it still running within a given week. Then this serial
experience is repeated the following week. Finally HBO then “reruns”
the entire thirteen-week cycle of shows to prepare viewers for a new
cycle, becoming in effect, a second-run movie house. HBO operates as a
theater chain with different show times, but its viewing is in the private
control of the home, which would include taping the show for rebroad-
cast at the “leisure” of the viewers. Cassette and disk copies of The So-
pranos are now available at video rental stores as well.
      One prominent feature of the Soprano home is a large TV screen,
where A. J. plays video games or Tony watches the History Channel on
cable. Thus, we may surmise Tony gets HBO; The Sopranos is about the
home, broadcast by Home Box Office to the home, and Tony is very
much in the home as is the television set itself, an intimate part of the
domestic decor of the American family dwelling, likely to be speaking at
all hours, even when no one is listening, the background noise and com-
panion to American family life. As many critics have noted, the experi-
ence of viewing films is fundamentally different from viewing television,
on the level of image projection and visual response all the way up to
and including the phenomenological occasion that each viewing experi-
ence suggests. Films are seen in large, darkened theaters, where the pro-
jection of an image comes frame by frame from behind the viewer toward
a brightened screen in front. The audience sits scattered in anonymity,
having paid for the experience of “going to” the film. The film is watched
consecutively without a break. The figures on the screen are enormous in
scale in comparison with the filmgoer’s body. Television is far more in-
timate and domesticated within the home. Barthes calls television the
very “opposite experience” of the cinema: “the space is familiar, orga-
nized by furniture and familiar objects, tamed. Television condemns us
to the family whose household utensil it has become” (Allen 187–188).
The television set, which may be lodged in the middle of many machines
in a home “entertainment system,” projects pictures out at the viewer,
who most often is in its light instead of a cinema’s darkness and may be
on the move or talking, eating, cooking, having sex, walking in and out
of the room, channel surfing, hitting the mute button, watching a cassette
on the VCR, and so on.
286                               Chapter 9



       Television also moves episode by episode in its regularly scheduled
programs in the pattern of the everyday, which suggests family and work
structures in a stable core behavior, against which almost any other be-
havior looks abnormal and must be defined against the normative and
absorbed by it (Ellis 158). Television generally regards the world from
isolated viewpoints (166), which, when added to TV production budgets
that are much smaller than those of cinema on the whole, combine to
make familiar repeated interior spaces the norm for series. Such stability
aids what Mimi White calls television’s “regulated latitude of ideological
positions” (Allen, 162–63), its even-handedness in balancing viewpoints
even within family disputes in an attempt not so much to disclose new
problems or social formations but to work through the known in the
guise of a simulated range of event and reflection. Thus The Sopranos can
posit Tony Soprano as haunted son and murderer but also as loving
father and family provider. The series may criticize Tony from Melfi’s
universalist professional high ground and Carmela’s religious faith at the
same time it retains Tony’s hegemony as a male action hero without
unresolvable contradiction or closure. In fact, the family itself is a cru-
cible like television itself, where all is to be admitted and forgiven. Tele-
vision in the guise of representational balancing might actually make The
Sopranos look more revolutionary than it is simply by cracking the male
monolithic mob discourse, not by a social criticism or by an insurgent
feminist critique but by giving the professional woman/maternal substi-
tute (Melfi) and the true woman/wife (Carmela) a chance to question
Tony through the melodramatic form itself, that of a domestic serial with
its strong links to nighttime TV soap opera such as the more business-
oriented Dallas and Falcon Crest, as well as the more sentimental
thirtysomething.32 Lest The Sopranos look too domesticated, part of its
evenhandedness comes from the equally strong segments of each epi-
sode in which Tony and his men act apart from the family and the women
in the suburbs to do their violent business and congregate in the back
room of Bada Bing to plot against their enemies. In such moments they
seem women-free except for the exotic dancers wriggling in the back-
ground, until they head for home.
       More recent TV workplace shows feature a mixed gendered profes-
sional family in, most often, the police station, law office, or hospital, the
preferred melodramatic workplace collective family of the 1990s (ER,
Ally McBeal, LA Law, St. Elsewhere, The Practice, Law and Order) that pretty
well cancels out specific domestic space and children and suggests such
segmentation to be out of date. The Sopranos doggedly retains a separate
domestic sphere, which TV seals and penetrates at odd postmodern
moments. On the TV show The Sopranos, Tony Soprano in his own living
room watches himself be arraigned in federal court on the ten o’clock
news, another television show. Carmela is utterly bereft as she identifies
with the heroine of Remains of the Day on her television set. Tony Soprano
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                   287



always drives back to the home that broadcasts The Sopranos; presumably
he can go inside and watch the show. The Sopranos extends the contradic-
tions of The Godfather into the problems and lives of those inheritors who
absorb the book and movie even as they adapt it, though no one on The
Sopranos ever mentions Puzo or his book; it’s all movie talk and culture.33
      Finally, HBO itself is a rival gang to network television, seeking to
grab its share of the audience from other TV corporate “families.” Much
of the early reporting about The Sopranos concerned its marketing and
promotion, the differences between the license granted to Chase and his
team set against the networks who passed on the show in development
but who now have spinoffs on the air and in production.34 HBO’s goal is
to make Sopranos images as widespread as possible, with tie-ins to music
CDs from each episode in the series. Soprano fan “megasites” are on the
Web, with instant transcripts of the show’s dialogue week by week, maps
of Tony’s route home through northern New Jersey, the actual address
and name of Bada Bing, and at the end of both seasons an on-line contest
to choose the best line spoken by a Sopranos character.35 Viewers were
encouraged to vote on line as to what they thought would happen in the
season finale. Besides The Sopranos regularly coming into their homes
(like mail delivery and waste management), viewers can purchase Sopra-
nos goods and images and participate in their family life as an American
media phenomenon and a shopping network. It’s too bad beleaguered
Tony can’t get a piece of the internet action on the Sopranos on
The Sopranos.
      Chase has perfected The Sopranos as a TV vehicle, but it wasn’t al-
ways that easy for him to accept his fate. He wanted movie fame outside
the medium, but now after The Sopranos success, he asks, “Where am I ever
going to go where it’s going to be this good again? (Carter “He Engineered
a Mob Hit” 90).36 Television becomes the known enclave, the cross-coded
ethnic and media security beyond further exploration into other forms
(cinema, cultures). Chase exhibits the classic signs of self-awareness about
the cultural capital of the two media, cinema and television, but comes
into a better relation to his role than did Puzo, who never accepted The
Godfather as a substitute for his earlier aspirations in fiction nor film as a
substitute for the novel. Chase’s cry about what is there for him past The
Sopranos mirrors his character Christopher’s attempt to leave the family
(the show?) for the movies, but he reluctantly comes back to the fold,
realizing that whatever he’s looking for “out there” cannot match what he
knows is familiar: Tony’s power, promises, and security. Chase creates
within TV at a level that few other continuing drama series have ever
achieved, while registering the tensions between “the life” of crime (tele-
vision) posited against his own ambitions in a more elite representation
(cinema). While providing the sensational action narrative that the TV
audience expects of mob narrative, Chase also gives the audience what it
equally expects, melodrama’s making vivid all moral choice and family
288                               Chapter 9



conflict. His melodrama laboring in the vineyards of TV with less cultural
capital than conferred by cinema seems to be providing a happy ending
for him, rather than the one depicted in Puzo’s going bad saga with The
Godfather when he wrote below his gifts. Television has become Chase’s
home, where he is at home with The Sopranos.
       Jean Luc Godard famously commented, “Television can project
nothing but US” (Allen 193), and so it is that Chris Albrecht, president
of HBO “original programming,” can say of The Sopranos that “these
characters are all completely relateable. The only difference between Tony
Soprano and me is that he’s a mob boss” (NYT 7). With such gleeful
identification, it’s no stretch at all to find Tony Soprano welcomed into
American homes with the values that his home espouses as the television
family becomes the surrogate for the normative society that mounts the
medium and controls the messages. Yet it would be a mistake to consider
The Sopranos as merely watered down mob narrative. In fact, television
sustains the dialogue with the culture that had most lionized The Godfa-
ther in the first place, seeing in its own power of absorption the ability
to domesticate the “other” and be thrilled by the residue of freedom in
violence that remains so American. The Sopranos also adapts, in Tony’s
discomfort and desire for grace, a last trace of the culture’s residual Puritan
insistence on individual responsibility, on the “what’s wrong with me”
that has driven our centuries-long idealism even as it fuels our narcis-
sism, until we no longer can distinguish one from the other. We still revel
in Tony’s individual freedom to solve his knottiest business problems swiftly
and without remorse. The sentimental hope to reform him to be a better
husband, father, and American citizen is countered by the audience’s sen-
sational thrill about Tony’s identity: stay as you are; solve your own prob-
lems; don’t become like everyone else. The schizophrenic vote appears to
be in: Americans no longer see much difference between Tony Soprano
and themselves. In fact, he has become a “representative man,” confused
by business, wife, children, parents, and self; he has assimilated even in
the face of his own protests as an Italian American victim. He is truly
troubled by dreams he cannot fathom, but he awakes and slips the yoke
of his conscience by wielding the male power that he still possesses on
behalf of family. Here is America’s most powerful and potentially most
dangerous enduring dream.

                               Conclusion

     The Corleones are finally welcomed at long last into middle-class
homes in The Sopranos. Don Corleone would be astonished at such as-
similation in the gaze of “strangers.” In the conclusion of The Sopranos’
second season finale, Chase provides cross-cutting scenes that reference
Coppola’s great scenes in the Godfather films where he juxtaposed reli-
gious and ceremonial family and cultural observance with murder. How-
                     The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos                   289



ever, Chase scales the ending down to fit Tony’s more bourgeois life of
crime and his family ties. Coppola had filmed Michael in somber ritual
becoming godfather to Carlo Rizzi’s child, while the heads of the Five
Families are being murdered (Godfather I). Then in Godfather II, Coppola
contrasted the murder of Fanucci by young Vito Corleone (his first kill-
ing) with a juxtaposed Feast Day celebration on the streets of Little Italy.
Finally in Godfather III, a crescendo of cross-references ends the film. Dur-
ing the opera Cavalleria Rusticana in Palermo, the new pope is assassinated
in Rome, while the Corleone organization takes vengeance against his and
their enemies; Michael’s daughter, Mary, dies by an assassin’s bullet. Chase’s
final vision in season two juxtaposes Tony’s family and business. The So-
pranos are at home celebrating daughter Meadow’s graduation from high
school, a suitable secular American ritual. However, earlier that day, Tony
participated in the killing of Pussy, his best friend, godfather to his son,
and mob informer. As the family poses for multiple pictures of an ex-
tended Soprano family, they smile, arms linked in solidarity, looking inno-
cent enough in family snapshots. Nobody asks, as they did at Anthony’s
confirmation party, “Where’s Pussy? Where’s the Godfather?”
      After each family moment, Chase cuts away to another of Tony’s
earning businesses: garbage trucks, adult theatres, the brokerage office,
calling card scam, high stakes card game. The swift cuts beg the ques-
tion: which is the real center of the Sopranos’ life? The family or the
businesses? What has enabled the Soprano family to gather with friends
in such secure comfort? Chase cuts to a Hasidic drug dealer whom Tony
shakes down and then to Dave, a sporting goods store owner and former
friend of Tony, who has gambled away his son’s college money in Tony’s
“executive game,” allowing Tony to gobble up his business with no re-
morse. Now Dave’s leaving town, having lost family, business, and re-
spect, a father who has not been as lucky as Tony, who has survived
murder attempts and federal indictments because of his menacing aura
and connections. Earlier in the day Tony had walked out of Melfi’s office
in a cocky mood, rejecting her observations: “You’re so angry with your
mother. But you never say ‘boo’ about her trying to kill you,” and even
though your mother “inflicted serious childhood injuries that are still
there, your father, the gangster, tough guy—did he protect you kids from
this borderline mother?” Tony weeps to her in mock despair, brutally
rebuffing her observation of “I pick up sorrow coming from you” with
“I had a dream I fucked your brains out right on that desk; you loved it.”
Tony goes male primitive to counter her intuition. Melfi has rallied from
her own fear of Tony to press him ever harder and the “sorrow” she
senses is over Pussy’s death. She, like Livia, calls him “Anthony,” which
is what Carmela calls A. J. Tony is last pictured contentedly puffing on
a cigar in his own living room in the bosom of his family, the good life
all around him, surviving another day of murder and denial with an-
other cycle of dread and depression sure to kick in after the euphoria of
290                              Chapter 9



triumphing over his enemies. However, the final image of The Sopranos’
second season is of the waves at the Jersey shore rolling in, presumably
over Pussy’s body. The melodrama continues.37
       The domestic melodrama would like to encompass male subjectiv-
ity and renegotiate the boundaries that might accommodate it (Torres
92), but the Soprano men don’t want to explain themselves within the
family space to anyone. They want the sexist divisions to remain. They
want their lives and identities back before therapy and female subjectivity.
They want, in short, to be Corleones, but their ideological position is
more tenuous, and Chase and his stable of writers are shrewd enough to
realize the dialogized potential of the male yearning and the outcry of
the lady Sopranos. We see Tony is in charge, but he is even more desper-
ate and ill despite outlasting his enemies and inquisitors. Pussy is dead.
Carmela grows more and more distant as she weighs an affair and for-
eign travel. Melfi is an alcoholic and losing her vocation. Christopher is
shot. Livia is remanded to the senior citizen home. Richie is killed by
Janice, who flees town. Junior is slowed by old age and illness, as well
as house arrest. Tony’s precise fear is that everything is conspiring to
push him under, literally and figuratively, a fear like that of Puzo and his
Gino Corbo in The Fortunate Pilgrim and Merlyn in Fools Die, but Chase
provides Tony with a relatively free pass into a fourth season with the
sopranos of The Sopranos still on his case. Yet a large question still re-
mains. How did Livia reduce Johnny Soprano from father and godfather
to a “squeakin’ little gerbil?” The absence of the father-godfather appears
ever more glaring as a missing piece in Tony’s life. Melfi calls him on this
fact in their last session in year two: “[Y]our mommy tried to kill you
and you give her airline tickets?” “Why didn’t your father, big tough
guy, protect you from her?” Isn’t that what “godfathers” do?
        Chase is much more candid than Puzo or Coppola in questioning
the premises upon which his characters act and believe. Yet the Sopranos
revisionism couldn’t exist without the narrative tradition laid down by
The Godfather for them to deconstruct. At the conclusion of Godfather III,
Michael Corleone tries to scream in primal horror at the assassination of
his daughter on the steps of the Palermo opera house, but no sound
comes out; he has no more orders to give, no retribution to take, no way
to eradicate his loss. He is neither a father nor a god but rather a silent
scream of a tragic hero walled in pain. Coppola and Puzo cared not at all
about about a female-centered form of melodrama. Opera (a traditional
Italian business) and melodrama are wings of the family business, and
the bass voice or basso—base, too, in its evil notes—is now covered in The
Sopranos by the siren voices of the sopranos, who sing to Tony about the
good and evil in his nature, about moral choice and individual respon-
sibility. It’s still all about him, but the women are coming on.
                         Conclusion


       Mario Puzo died in July 1999 after The Sopranos’ first season on
HBO. What he felt about the series, if anything, has not been reported.
Although the current of energy in the mob narrative had been out of his
control for decades, having passed into the hands of other writers, screen-
writers, and directors, Puzo himself never ceased to wonder at that suc-
cess and provide his own stubbornly realistic view of it. In 1996 at the
publication of The Last Don, Puzo granted a series of interviews for the
first time in twenty years. He had never been interested in the rise of
multiethnic literature as a study. Instead, the picture he left us with is
that of a retired don of pop fiction, at peace with himself and proud of
his achievements. He said that “it might have been preferable to be in the
Mafia. I’m glad I’m a writer, but it’s hard work. Nobody likes to work
hard,” and “just because a guy’s a murderer, he can’t have endearing
traits?” (McShane 1). I miss him. I miss his amoral storytelling, his cheer-
ful and complacent nihilism, his lack of pretense, the way he could hide
as a shrewd and watchful peasant to invoke “cunning” and “destiny” at
one moment and tell a delicious Hollywood or Las Vegas anecdote the
next. He never dissembled, never preached, never wrapped himself as
anything other than what he was.
       At times in these interviews, Puzo gave what appeared to be stock
answers he thought his public wanted after years of American opinion
hounding him about the ethics of characters in his novels: “I don’t like
crime. I’m very moralistic against crime. In my work, a significant part
of my writing is a commentary on America and its judicial system”
(Fleming 1). One searches in vain for this crusading Puzo in his writing,
except for Bonasera’s lament at the opening of The Godfather. He ob-
served that “in both my Mafia books I’ve wanted to show the parallel
between the normal business world and the Mafia” (Fleming 2) and that
the Corleones and Clericuzios are more “old-style Sicilian Dons: “[T]hese
guys know how to use violence as a business tool” (Fleming 2), ending
with “[T]he old guys were men of honor” who had “family values.” By
1996, how much could Puzo recall of his original intent, and wasn’t he
simply doing what writers have always done: take refuge in critic and
readers’ versions of what they were supposed to be up to? He had long
since become his success by writing about omerta and in doing so, he

                                    291
292                 The Godfather and American Culture



made omerta itself audible, to the point where the language of silence has
been fully disclosed in language, where silence has been named.
       One continuing thread in Puzo’s last interviews is how proud he was
of the money he had made. He cheerfully asked, “You know how many
copies I sold? I got the money. Nobody said I just sold books. I got money.
Statistics, they don’t mean anything unless you get the money. . . . To me,
money is the focus of everything you see people do (Zaleski 212). In a
fundamental way, he returned to what he had stressed in Fools Die when
Merlyn hides his bribe money for Las Vegas under his manuscripts, when
Puzo sent up the Paris Review writers’ interview format by asking them to
go out and ask the real question of a Harold Robbins: how much money
did he make? This firm view finally explains mob narrative to a limited
degree. Is murder at last finally just a business strategy? The codes and
honor at long last all do pertain to the money: that’s what people get killed
for in mob narrative, so that the “earnings” may continue; that’s what
Puzo’s books are about so that sales may continue. No current American
fictional narrative comes closer to speaking this hard fact about financial
life in our culture.1 For better or worse, this is where we are in consuming
Godfather narrative, accepting it in a melodrama that endlessly goes over
the intertextual bonded entities: Money/Violence/Family. Extreme violence
and domestic warmth are repeatedly our most powerful visual images in
mob narrative and throughout the history of American popular fiction.
Before Puzo perfected violence in The Godfather as third term in his triad,
he had Lucia Santa in The Fortunate Pilgrim be more lyrical and dubious
about money as substitute for family. She marveled that in America,
“[m]oney guarded the lives of your children. . . . Money was a new home-
land” (84). The family business did indeed turn out to be murder, the first
product in the line, in which various covers of olive oil and “protection”
stock the front shelves. When murder becomes a practice rather than a
stunning immoral interlude, we have good reason to question writers and
directors and their choices, as well as an entire subgenre. Making murder
familiar and ordinary is the radical work done by mob narrative, and that
will always be frightening and compelling when conveyed with Puzo’s
storytelling power, Coppola’s visual gifts, or the intelligence of Chase in
The Sopranos.
       The Godfather is launched on its fourth decade of reader and audi-
ence reception. The American audience that greeted The Sopranos in 1999
is very different from that which first encountered The Godfather in 1969.
Interest in the Corleones has never flagged, and The Sopranos has risen to
continue to shape mob narrative in one of the most acclaimed programs
in television history. The Godfather had been written at a time of cultural
revolution among the young as well as landmark moments in the Civil
Rights movement. Yet it always already had a retro feel: reaffirmation of
the patriarchy, uncomplicated Freudian passing of authority from father
to son, the subjugation of women, the winning of a “just” war against
                                 Conclusion                               293



“them.” Such palatable tales within melodrama made The Godfather a
classic conservative popular text in ways similar to Stowe’s Christian
millennial recontainment of slavery, which would end in God’s Own
Good Time, in Uncle Tom’s Cabin or to Mitchell’s apologia for the Old
South and for Reconstruction’s necessities in Gone with the Wind.
       Moreover, The Sopranos comes to us now at the end of an era when
identity politics of all kinds has shaped academic, critical, and national
discussions of rights, privilege, and American passage. In 1969, the
Corleones seldom called attention to their being Italian. They were aware
of themselves as themselves; their solidarity and roots were understood,
but Puzo in the novel never privileged that knowledge.2 His characters
were not spokespeople for ethnicity. Michael Corleone gestures toward
“the good simple life of well-to-do Americans” (363) in a naive shorthand,
a conflated simplicity with riches in the heyday of American postwar
optimism where the goal was Main Street joining the country club, the
desirable world of frozen 1950s Technicolor movies. Tony Soprano, how-
ever, is a firmly ensconced ideologue on identity. He may live in a large
suburban home, but he does not worry about becoming “legitimate” or
even care what that means. He has enough problems with his work as it
is, and he remains adamantly Italian, even though he’s more integrated
into American society than the Corleones ever were. His dialogues with
Dr. Melfi are a study of identity practices, often about gender issues but
just as often about ethnic or class issues. He knows instinctively the iden-
tity game, how to “convert structural disenfranchisement into a means of
claiming cultural and political power” (Farred 631) to rhetorically block
Melfi’s probes, which threaten to strip him of his tenaciously held identity,
one that allows him to function as mob boss. “What do poor Italian immi-
grants have to do with you?” is Melfi’s question from an identity critique.
Kay’s question to Michael (“What if everybody felt the same way?”) was
a universalist question from America’s civic heart about license and order
and was not specifically ethnic or about identity at all.
       What the Corleones or Tony Soprano would be without their ethnic
or mob identities is a question that postidentity politics can’t answer at
present. The emphasis on analysis in The Sopranos is also an identity search,
to have Tony find himself within alternate paradigms of behavior. Freud-
ian analysis is the perfect therapy for an identitarian century since
analysands are authorized to find what selves they inhabit or want to
inhabit. Such an essentially metacritical errand makes Tony an everyman
for both popular and elite audiences: the ethnic son practicing self-scrutiny.
Before Tony’s analysis, the most a Corleone could envision was the chance
to “live the fact that you are who you are can be doubled by the respon-
sibility to be who you are” (Michaels 84): a Sicilian; my father’s son; a
murderer; a godfather. The Corleones had come to inhabit exactly them-
selves. Melfi threatens Tony’s equivalence, and he has no one else to be.3
The Godfather projected the creation of a powerful identitarian logic, which
294                   The Godfather and American Culture



The Sopranos is in part dismantling. Within the curve of these three decades
(1969–2001) is the construction, flourishing, and reaction against identity
politics, all carried out within essentialist and nonessentialist pluralism.
      I retain my fascination for the mob narrative form and its compelling
window on our national contradictions. First, consider the vehicle: poor
unloved popular fiction, besieged by the right for triviality and moral slack-
ness, by the critical center for a lack of formal complexity, and by the left for
false consciousness. Only loved by millions and millions for portraying
society’s major concerns in sensational and sentimental fashion. Popular
fiction is often a way of staying behind for the audience, in reworking nar-
ratives that never go out of fashion, no matter how literary critics might
deem them tedious or simple, to reach back for families that don’t seem far
removed from clans, loyalties that can’t be broken, affiliations of blood.
Popular fiction’s immediate and opaque power counters technology, evolu-
tion, maturation, assimilation, emancipation, global homogenization, com-
plexity, doubt, secularism, and irony—for starters. Puzo appropriated ethnicity
without its alternative questioning, without its individuating energy in con-
cert with other forces in a dialogue with America. In the ethnic melodrama
of business and family, he found the generic equivalent of a mythical
storytelling that retained the immediate power that a more reflective and
less sensational elite fiction often trades for complexity.
      It can be argued that it’s a mistake to ask gifted sensational writers
to give us a totally balanced picture of their subject since what they do
is touch nerves down deep. In 1996, Puzo himself took refuge in one of
the oldest dodges that aesthetics allows, even to its rank and file: “if
you’re a true novelist, your first duty is to tell a story; if you want to
moralize, write non-fiction, philosophy, whatever” (Zaleski 214). So I
have essentially followed his advice in criticism (non-fiction), having
examined why we want to moralize at times about Puzo, to ask first,
who made him a moral free agent who could talk about murder with
immunity, and then to follow out my intuitions by seeking answers in
moral philosophy’s debates, particularly in the Humean legacy of a criti-
cism through and of sentiments.
      Those sentiments bring me one last time to the bourgeois public
sphere in a pluralist society that in its tolerance and flexibility toward all
difference appears to have absorbed mob narrative and made it “like”
and “same” instead of “other.” The Corleones and Sopranos view their
own families as worthy of absolute respect but no one else’s. They reject
one vital half of the American liberal pluralist tolerance of differences,
the granting to other groups of essential human value and dignity, thus
rejecting any notion of a common enterprise in America. In terms of the
illogic of narcissistic and absolute identitarian difference, mob narrative
is fundamentally obsessed with and in its isolation. In this extreme sense,
the Corleones and Sopranos do not oppose the differential structures of
                                Conclusion                             295



pluralism; rather, they are the conservative expression of it. As American
as apple pie.
       However, within my harsh labeling of the Corleones and the Sopra-
nos as the very expression of the American business and family life itself,
I would say in conclusion that Puzo and his inheritors continue to pro-
vide a male dream of anarcho-resistance to regulation and order in a
civic society in favor of more traditional and pragmatic allegiances and
alliances within identity. America lives with mob narrative the same way
it lives with payoffs to “benevolent associations,” with unreported in-
come, white collar crime, executive CEO salaries in the millions, union
gauging, sweetheart contracts, presidential pardons, lobbying and cam-
paign money infractions, and so on. Mob narrative becomes a more vivid
and distant (hence manageable in fantasy) version of the economic facts
that Americans face every day.4
       Mob narrative also provides a psychically licensed space to hunt
with the pack. Such a fierce but essentially cautious profile in mob narra-
tive never takes that next step into a shared American optimism or ideal-
ism. The Corleones, the Sopranos, and all the other goodfellas take
advantage of all American freedoms and tolerance but contribute nothing
to the greater commonweal, calling all the rest of us “strangers,” but oh,
how we long for their version of community, for the decisiveness that the
dream of threatened violence promises, even as we must work out our
accommodations more slowly and maturely in various sublimations; myth
and melodrama seems so much more thrilling than realism, when dis-
played back across our social contracts. The Corleones and Sopranos be-
come potent and powerful white men, physically darker and dangerous,
with personal and financial power. In the end, mob narrative must be
called a deeply male dream of patriarchy and order, one that cannot ac-
count for anything like a full field of human sympathies and still only
admits women and children as victims, ornaments, scolds, or justifications
for all actions taken on their behalf.
       A Cold War America greeted Puzo’s novel in 1969, a country wag-
ing a long, tense war with an implacable ideological foe as well as fight-
ing a highly visible war in Vietnam, a country looking for peace, détente,
survival of family, and values. Over the decades as both the Vietnam War
and the Cold Wars dissolved into a sustained national prosperity and
technological future, the early audiences for Puzo’s novel (1969) and
Coppola’s first two Godfather films (1972–74) are perhaps now at their
high point of influence and power in the American media and commod-
ity life, which accounts in part for the obsessive citations and copying of
mob language and lore. Will The Godfather’s relevance and referentiality
be passed on to new generations? A strong counternarrative in American
culture is telling us we don’t need aggressive patriarchal males anymore,
that they are redundant and dangerous to the social organism. In social
296                 The Godfather and American Culture



and cultural terms, as well, The Godfather and The Sopranos are ways of
staying behind in strong residual formations of traditional order, even as
the cracks in the edifice are everywhere. A case in point could be the
difference between the older Soprano gang members who revere “Al”
and “Francis” and do their Godfather numbers, while Christopher would
rather be Vince Vaughn or Jon Favreau; he knows deep down that he’ll
never be Michael Corleone, anymore than will Tony Soprano, who has his
own suspicions about survival. Vito (Andolini) Corleone, Michael Corleone,
Tony Soprano, and Christopher Moltisanti comprise four different genera-
tions who work out their American dreams within mob narrative.
       Marianna Torgovnick has called for a more responsive “I” and “We”
in criticism, to take into account a more supple individual voice as well
as a collective voice of responsibility and community, that we need to
learn how to do these “voices” in concert and do them better (149).5
Writing this book has taught me a great deal about this negotiation. A
contemporary critique of pluralism’s unexamined premises describes it
as containing “a tacit supremacism [which] easily coexists with political
liberalism, flexibility, inclusion, and generosity; it consists of the quiet
expectation that its procedures and standards will be taken as a dispute’s
rules of arbitration—that its concerns count the most” (Gordon and
Newfield 398). Pluralism is no privileged vantage point at long last for
it includes not only those with accrued moral capital who can afford the
“flexibility,” “inclusion,” and “generosity” in setting standards for judg-
ing The Godfather6 but also a Don Corleone, who precisely simulates such
lived procedures when it suits him; to patiently (flexibly) wait out an
adversary, to bind (include) someone to him, to come through for his
extended family (generosity), to quite simply define all the rules so that
the family’s concerns come first. He replicates that “tacit supremacism”
all the time. In this case, we would have to conclude, as Michael in
Godfather II tells the corrupted Senator Pat Geary, who would excoriate
him, that “we’re all part of the same hypocrisy, Senator.” Yet such a
conclusion need not only be in Michael’s rueful truth shared with a vil-
lain/victim but also in the fact that the Corleones and their audience (us)
are indeed more “like” than “different” in America in so many important
ways that speak our yearnings and affiliations, and that fact accounts as
much as any for their amazing popularity. Since American culture re-
fuses to confer full civic status or often even a simple humanity to so
many, what recourse is there except to come into the American arena
arrayed in identity? This is the question that mob narrative continues to
model with goodfellas who also pass as fathers and businessmen.
       Analyzing how the Corleones became Our Gang in The Godfather
has moved me to respect the view of the unassimilated and the reasons
they remain so, to crack the code of myth and melodrama’s understand-
ing of the strains of living the extremities of our postindustrial capitalism
                                Conclusion                             297



and attempting to integrate our long-hallowed views of family at the
center of American life. In living with Puzo, I’ve come to respect his long
struggle against famelessness in our culture and his need to overcome it
in any way possible. I regret the laziness of a great storyteller but laud
his honesty. I sense even more our culture’s great fascination with mob
narrative and the need to express what it might mean. The writing has
taught me also to understand the power of long-standing American
rhythms and assumptions about family and business. The project has let
me trust my reading instincts in the corners of popular texts and call the
material “significant” while learning how to be morally and ethically
involved in my critical errand. The question of who has the right to use
violence in a society, if anyone, and how that right is sanctioned, cen-
sured, and qualified in fiction is food enough for any critic and writing
project, and I hope this issue has been illuminated here.
      Siting The Godfather in American culture is finally about how to
negotiate America as a text for authors, readers, critics, immigrants, and
families. It’s about the things we carry as we move from one group and
identity to another and back again: ideals, people, conditioning, dreams,
and metaphors. Here, at last, is the American family business in popular
fiction, which we read through Puzo.
This page intentionally left blank.
                                  Notes


                                Introduction

       1. How Puzo and Coppola collaborated on the screenplays will be an in-
teresting subject for both film scholars and Godfather critics. Puzo’s papers at
present have been withdrawn.
       2. Tony Soprano, already a child of Hemingway-era movies, protests to his
psychiatrist that Gary Cooper wasn’t in touch with his feelings; he was a “strong
silent type, that was an American” (Sopranos 1, 1). Tony references traditional
male silence fostered in the Western genre as his model, but he appears as the
mob boss avatar of this silence himself, as well as a historian of his own generic
role.
       3. I’m indebted to Gina Frangello for pointing out this important differ-
ence between The Godfather as lived and The Godfather as made.
       4. Fisher pragmatically notes a large exclusion in the absorption of regions
by the core culture when he comments that gender and race are what within
American experience can’t be altered by mobility or succession of generations.


     Chapter 1. Popular Fiction: Taste, Sentiment,
             and the Culture of Criticism

      1. Bourdieu provides dozens of examples of class-based responses to paint-
ings in Distinction.
      2. Kant’s “Intellectual Power of Judgment” which is to lead to “moral feel-
ing” is cordoned off from history and politics, beginning a priori in maxims,
which craft a law for everyone through a judgment not based on any interest.
However, Kant allows that the intellectual power of judgment is not based on
any interest but may give rise to one. Kant’s interest is in the activity of judging,
which he wants to describe as procedure: “The disinterestedness of the judge-
ments of taste is only one element of the whole characterization of these judge-
ments” (Kemal 105). After a judgment has been made, an interest can be con-
nected to it, says Kant (Kemal 101), but it’s difficult to translate such a sequence
into actual reading and interpretation of texts. Such a sequence suggests fixed
opinions and programmatic assignment of effects.
      3. Jane Tompkins concludes her West of Everything by casting the going bad
frame as the Western’s “retaliatory violence,” that “the hero is finally provoked

                                        299
300                    The Godfather and American Culture


and “vengeance, by the time it arrives, feels biologically necessary” (228). Writ-
ers, readers, and critics eagerly pursue such a justification in popular fiction; they
do what they gotta do.
       4. Jonathan Glover “is also right in believing that our hope for the future
must, to a considerable extent depend on the sympathy and respect with which
we respond to things happening to others” Amartya Sen, “East and West: The
Reach of Reason,” New York Review of Books, July 20, 2000, p. 34. See Glover,
Humanity: A Moral History of the Twentieth Century.
       5. John Guillory observes that “pluralism forms the basis for a critique of
aesthetic discourse itself inasmuch as that discourse appears to subsume the
differences between different groups into the ideological ‘universality’ of aes-
thetic value, the same universality which virtually founds aesthetics in Kant’s
Critique of Judgment” (271).
       6. Booth himself is caught in the quest for the one true reading, the sum-
mary evaluation. He has no interest in the critics’ hesitancies and sustained
quandaries unless and until they lead to the right judgment. He also disparages
the popular in relation to elite fiction and roughs up Jaws to show how he can
assimilate and dismiss it after sampling two pages, though he elsewhere states
that “to understand a book well enough to repudiate it, you have to make it part
of yourself, really live with it” (202, 285). He conflates judgments (sentimental,
shallow, pretentious, decadent, bourgeois) with experiencing these states in the
work itself. The literary-critical naming system is not as closed as Booth suggests.
He fears “collusion with the accused” (285) when reading popular texts, a con-
tamination of the aesthetic with the moral and ethical.
       7. What I am positing here through articulating Jameson’s hard-won ethical
negations is a more affirmative use of the massive pessimism of the Critical Theory
of Horkheimer and Adorno, themselves pioneers in conceiving of popular and
high culture artifacts as part of the same inadequate imaginative response, through
a methodology that influences Jameson’s dialectic and yet is more qualified by his
residue of romanticism within the hard sayings.
       8. Hume provided the best and still most encompassing categorization of
our infinite variety in taste judgments: “one person is more pleased with the
sublime; another with the tender; a third with raillery. One has a strong sensibil-
ity to blemishes, and is extremely studious of correctness: another has a more
lively feeling of beauties, and pardons twenty absurdities and defects for one
elevated or pathetic stroke” (“Of the Standard of Taste” 314).


                     Chapter 2. Mario Puzo:
                   An American Writer’s Career

       1. Yet the rambling apologia that is Fools Die should remind us that suc-
cess, whether achieved by a Puzo or by a Melville descending through the laby-
rinth of Moby Dick to the sentimentally grotesque and inbred Pierre brings its own
costs in American literary life through literary creations hybrid and still-born. If
the American Success Story is really the American Failure Story, as countless
                                Notes to Chapter 3                               301



American texts have shown us over the centuries, the ironic state of “late” rather
than “early” literary success is a happening for which we don’t have as
many models.
        2. If The Godfather were an elite text, I might go into more depth in describ-
ing Nino as the author-manqué. Rabinowitz’s suggestions of what conventions
we follow “before reading” are certainly relevant to the general critical view that
nothing can really be learned by studying a popular novel as a kunstlerroman or
a roman a clef.
        3. Godfather II might have been the novel sequel, instead of the second
Academy Award winning Godfather film (1974), had Puzo gone to work on that
text. A collection and cataloging of Puzo’s papers, including novel drafts and film
scripts for the Godfather movies is a badly needed next step for study of The
Godfather.
        4. Contemporary Authors New Revision Series 42, p. 367. The wry “rich and
famous” line is very much in keeping with what Puzo calls his “casual irony,” that
he laments reviewers did not catch in his rendering of the Corleones. Such a generic
“epiphany” is much valued in best sellers, as in Scarlett O’Hara’s famous “As God
is my witness, I’ll never go hungry again,” in Gone with the Wind.
        5. So infuriating were these pieces that James Jones kept a copy of the
essay in his Paris flat so that visiting writers could jot appropriate and obscene
comments in the margins next to Mailer’s prose. Jones’s wife, Gloria, relates
another side to this group of writers: “There was a kind of closeness because
these guys were very special and understood they were smarter than most people,
plus they knew that as novelists they were the best around. They saw themselves
as part of the same very special club, a club that you had to be real good to get
into. . . . There was that sense of us against them” (Manso 275). Puzo never re-
ceived bids to rush this fraternity.
        6. Freed from the mob narrative and its dominated or marginalized women,
Puzo’s Hollywood women are more lively, interesting, and sensual characters, as
the female writers, directors, and stars of The Last Don (1996) attest.
        7. In the film adaptation of Some Came Running, Dave Hirsh lives, but
Ginnie is shot to death, presumably for the crime of being an insufficient working-
class muse for a depressed middle-class writer.


                Chapter 3. Bakhtin and Puzo:
               Authority as the Family Business

       1. The following are Bakhtin’s most familiar texts to date in English trans-
lation: The Dialogic Imagination (1981); The Formal Method in Literary Scholarship
(1978); Marxism and the Philosophy of Language (1973); Problems of Dostoevsky’s
Poetics (1984); and Rabelais and His World (1984).
       2. Puzo does not tell the reader that the two old confederates are speaking
in Sicilian dialect, although the intimate occasion would certainly suggest it.
Throughout his fiction Puzo remains careless about Italian language transaction
and occasions, evincing no consistent pattern in citing the language shift. Coppola
302                    The Godfather and American Culture


makes much of Solozzo changing to Sicilian dialect to speak with Mike in the
restaurant just before the double murder. Gardaphe believes that “Puzo’s repre-
sentation of Italian language throughout the books is based more often than not
on aural transcriptions of Italian words and Italian American dialect” (Italian
Signs 213).
        3. Bakhtin believes that “incorporated into the novel are a multiplicity of
‘language’ and verbal-ideological belief systems—generic, professional, class-and-
interest group . . . tendentious, everyday . . . and so forth” (The Dialogic Imagina-
tion 311).
        4. Bakhtin writes, “In a hidden polemic . . . the other’s words are treated
antagonistically, and this antagonism, no less than the very topic discussed, is
what determines the author’s discourse” (Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics 195).
        5. Coppola’s Godfather I does not capture any of the resonances or nuances
of the Genco–Don Corleone interview. Perhaps Coppola felt the scene came too
early in the narrative to introduce a complex, ironic viewpoint of the Don’s power.
        6. “Stylization stylizes another’s style in the direction of that style’s own
particular tasks. It merely renders those tasks conventional.” (Problems of
Dostoevsky’s Poetics 193).
        7. In his essay on crime in America, Puzo wrote that “society, cloaked in
the robes of law, masked by religion, armed with authority, sprung from the
beginning of history, is itself the archcriminal of mankind” (The Godfather Papers
80). All the cadences from the Genco–Don Corleone passage are here in the deep
distrust of the legitimacy of any man-made institutions. With society as
“archcriminal” here and death as the “foul criminal” in the Genco interview, the
equivalance is clear: society equals death itself for Puzo.
        8. Here is an excellent example of the sloganeering of popular fiction
about the moral supremacy of the truly strong man, with its uncomfortable
political associations.
        9. For a full discussion of destiny in its relation to melodrama and to
American Manifest Destiny, see chapter 6, “Destiny as Authorizing Melodrama.”
       10. A classic spokesperson and high culture text for this authority would be
the Lady Catherine de Bourgh in Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice. In her climactic
interview with Elizabeth Bennet, Lady Catherine thunders, “I will not be inter-
rupted! Hear me in silence!” as she attempts to stop the match with her nephew
Darcy. Of course, Austen has Elizabeth Bennet carry the day with internally per-
suasive argument, even though Lady Catherine is not persuaded.
       11. Giovanni Sinicropi had an early criticism that Puzo needed “a vehicle
that would have allowed him to give us a dispassionate and courageous analysis
of both the Mafia and the corporation, instead of a fresco glorifying the family
‘gestes.’ Puzo refused to go that far.” Thus, he concluded that “the Mafia, even
elevated to the rank of a corporation, remains as mysterious as ever” (90).
       12. See Stephen Greenblatt, Shakespearean Negotiations: The Circulation of So-
cial Energy in Renaissance England (1988), especially chapter 2, “Invisible Bullets,”
21–65.
       13. Barthes would say that these scenes state the presence of the Don’s
power, where the reader “consumes the myth according to the very ends built
into its structure” (Mythologies 128).
                                Notes to Chapter 4                               303



       14. The costs to the Corleones of continual victory is a primary subject of
Coppola’s Godfather II, in part a response to negative criticism of The Godfather
novel and Godfather I that the Corleones were not sufficiently “punished.”
       15. In The Dark Arena, Puzo stressed World War II as a shaping force on his
stoical protagonist, Mosca. Puzo had disregarded such large historicizing by the
time of The Godfather.
       16. Wayne Booth comments that the reader may undermine the author by
becoming “an intending ironist in his own right” and thus becoming “part of the
significance the text may acquire” (A Rhetoric of Irony 39). He also states that in
irony, “we read character and value, we refer to our deepest convictions. For this
reason, irony is an extraordinarily good road into the whole art of interpretation”
(44). Granting Booth’s premises, irony is not without its own hierarchical defor-
mations of text and message.


                  Chapter 4. The Godfather and
                      the Ethnic Ensemble

       1. William Boelhower, Immigrant Autobiography in the United States (1982);
Through a Glass Darkly: Ethnic Semiosis in American Literature (1987); “Adjusting
Sites” (1999). Werner Sollors, Beyond Ethnicity: Consent and Descent in American
Culture (1986); ed., The Invention of Ethnicity (1989); Anthony Julian Tamburri, A
Semiotic of Ethnicity: In (Re)cognition of the Italian/American Writer (1998).
       2. Gardaphe has commented that what is called the “Southern Problem” in
Italy, one even raised by Northern Italians, then became the “Italian problem” in
America (5).
       3. The basic outlook of people in “Southern Italy” has been described by
Edward Banfield as “amoral familism” and by Robert Putnam as a “culture of
distrust” (Barone 242).
       4. Such a reliance on the performative aspect of language and its visual,
bodily motions suggests why mob narrative has been best represented by cinema
since Coppola’s Godfather I in 1972.
       5. Such as Puzo’s own The Fortunate Pilgrim (praised by Boelhower) and
the writing of John Fante, Pietro DiDonato, and Jere Mangione (see Gardaphe,
chapter 2, “The Early Mythic Mode,” 55–85).
       6. In Godfather I in the same scene, Kay and Michael are coming out of a
theater after viewing The Bells of St. Mary’s (1945) starring Bing Crosby as a singing
priest and Ingrid Bergman as a no-nonsense nun at a struggling Catholic school.
       7. Gardaphe raised the possibility that The Godfather is a study in “reverse
assimilation, “ asking “what would happen if an Italian had the power to make
America conform to his or her way of seeing/being in the world? (94). I see
Michael’s initial reversion to the Family’s side in a slightly altered frame. To
become his father’s son is to unassimilate prior to beginning to bend American
systems and society to his will.
       8. Michael here shows traces of a Tom Joad in Steinbeck’s The Grapes of
Wrath. An aura of Depression-era rhetoric, Puzo’s formative decade, hangs over
Michael’s class analysis.
304                    The Godfather and American Culture


        9. Hagen as adopted son generally shows more knowledge of Mafia codes
than anyone in the Corleone family. When the huge dead fish is returned to the
Corelone compound wrapped in Luca Brasi’s bulletproof vest, Tom knows “It’s
an old Sicilian message” (118).
       10. Torgovnick’s comment was that Italian Americans believe that not say-
ing something aloud “allays the truth” and calls it “faith in euphemism” (71).
       11. Michael’s grin here reminds of Sonny grinning nervously after the Don
drops all pretense about his role as a murderer (222). “Grinning” signifies that
the jig is up and both omerta and bella figura have failed.
       12. It’s important to recognize the Italian American fictional tradition in
which the “honest hard-working Italian immigrant family” portrayed in the fic-
tion of Fante, DiDonato, and Mangione functions “as a community united against
an alien and hostile outside world.” Puzo adds to this earlier, more realistic
fiction and memoir the fantasy of absolute control over the American environ-
ment (Gardaphe 86).
       13. We might speculate here that Puzo is referencing the Kennedys as an
American family of power and wealth. Certainly the trajectory of Michael
Corleone’s career as the son of a powerful American criminal father, his war
heroism in the Pacific, his brief Ivy League sojourn, his return in 1946 to “run”
for Don recalls John F. Kennedy’s career (even to following in his dead brother
Joe’s footsteps as politician when he really wanted to be a historian or writer).
Not the least of America’s subconscious identifications with the Corleones may
be as shadow Kennedys on a more overtly sensational side of business, “diplo-
macy,” and leadership. Puzo’s most neglected novel The Fourth K (1990) depicts
a future Kennedy president (Francis Xavier Kennedy) who must make terrible
choices after his daughter is killed by terrorists. The book turns muddled and
dark rather than a moment-to-moment thriller. Kennedy becomes an embittered
and dangerous fascist, and the text is strewn with questionable views of just
about everyone: blacks, Arabs, Jews, and all people in power. Here is a ranting
Puzo text for further study.
       14. Recall Ralph Ellison’s grandfather at the outset of Invisible Man (1952)
who tells his grandson to “live with your head in the lion’s mouth. I want you
to overcome ’em with yeses, undermine ’em with grins, agree’em to death and
destruction, let ’em swoller you till they vomit or bust wide open” (19–20). Luce
Irigary in This Sex Which Is Not One (1985) has famously posited the strategy of
woman playing with mimesis, “miming” the oppressed female role by “try[ing]
to recover the place of her exploitation by discourse, without allowing herself to
be simply reduced to it” (76).
       15. “Heteroglossia wash[es] over a culture’s awareness of itself and its
language, [and] penetrate[s] to its core.” The Dialogic Imagination, p. 368.
       16. Williams’ “To Elsie” (1923) is a classic, unsentimental rendering of a
New Jersey hired girl from an immigrant background, so overwhelmed by life’s
dismal present that Williams sees her only in a grim future that mocks both
nature’s beauty and God’s dispensation: “Somehow it seems to destroy us. . . . /
No one/ to witness and adjust/no one to drive the car.”
       17. Sandra (Mortola) Gilbert commented, “I wanted a name that didn’t reek
of garlic and cigars, didn’t ooze olive oil, had never drunk red wine. . . . I wanted—
                                 Notes to Chapter 4                                 305



to be perfectly frank—a name that never met a mafioso (57); Hutcheon wrote of
“cryptoethnicity,” having been born “Bortalotti.” She also notes that Davidson,
an editor of American Literature, prefers “Notari-Fineman-Kotoski,” the sign of
growing up Italian, Russian, German Jew, and Polish Catholic (247). Boelhower,
the most theoretically challenging multiethnic critic of American fiction, teaches
and lives in Italy.
       18. Boelhower in “Adjusting Sites” calls habitare an ethnos comprised of a
place, a set of characters, and a customary behavior (65).
       19. Gardaphe writes, “The Godfather was the first novel with which I could
completely identify,” and “Puzo’s use of Italian sensibilities made me realize that
literature could be made out of my own experiences” (“Breaking and Entering” 7).
       20. Such scrutiny of America from the ethnic subject survives into The
Godfather in fragments, such as when Don Corleone wonders that his soldier son
Michael “performs these miracles for strangers” in World War II, whereas Lucia
Santa marvels at the goodness of strangers helping her family.
       21. Puzo gets credit for the story of Superman; the screenplay is credited to
Puzo, Robert Benton, David Newman, and Leslie Newman.
       22. In the original Superboy comic strip, begun in 1942 by Jerry Siegel and Joe
Shuster after their 1930s success of Superman, their hero is given a past as a super
baby whose craft crashes into the all-American town of Smallville. The Kents in the
comic strip were townspeople, older and well-dressed, with the father in a snapbrim
hat and topcoat, driving a roadster when they spot the infant by the road after he
crashed to earth. By the 1980s, with American cinematic images of young Clark
Kent in the Superman film racing express trains through farmfields, the Kents in the
redrawn comic strip are rattling along in a brown pick-up truck with the father
wearing overalls when they find the baby; back on the farm, young Clark breaks
a tractor in half. We may surmise that Puzo’s Fresh Air Fund idyll in New Hamp-
shire had much to do with moving the Kents out into rural America. (Superman
from the Thirties to the Eighties, 12, 15, 276).
       23. Michaels suggests in Our America that “what is most valuable is what
cannot be lost,” that the “thing that you cannot lose is the thing that cannot be
separated from you; it is not so much yours as it is you” (97).
       24. Michael is “suddenly caught by something to which he belongs with-
out knowing it,” as Boelhower cites Viscusi writing about such flashes of invol-
untary insight. Boelhower references Lentricchia in Johnny Critelli that “in 1993,
at the age of fifty four, ‘he had gained sudden and inexplicable access to the
past’ ” (67). Here is Michael’s first flashback in the movie, one that he’s helpless
to control, that comes out of nowhere. Boelhower cites Carlo Ginzburg “enlarg-
ing what appears to be insignificant” (69), and calls this an example the “Italian
school of microhistory” in the mid 1970s, what is now generally labeled
New Historicism.
       25. Lentricchia writes from inside this dynamic series of food, people, and
writing in Johnny Critelli: “Christ, I’m hungry. . . . They die while you write the book,
while you’re writing. Eat these sentences, these are their bodies. The last supper is a
supper of sentences. The only supper” (31).
       26. Rose Basile Green identified this pattern of Puzo’s heroes as early as The
Dark Arena in the psyche of Walter Mosca, who, “finding that he does not relate
306                    The Godfather and American Culture


any longer to his family, [he] withdraws into the state of emotional paralysis that
is his personal isolation” (342). A very high modernist fate indeed.



                  Chapter 5. Barthes and Puzo:
                  The Authority of the Signifier

        1. Terry Eagleton provides a preliminary analysis of the reader’s inevitable
ideological matrix in Criticism and Ideology, (167).
        2. Kay’s statement is seconded by Grace Kelly in High Noon (1952) just
before Gary Cooper goes out to duel Frank Miller’s gang. She says, “I don’t care
who’s right or wrong. There has to be some better way for people to live.”
Westerns particularly encode such a yearning as they chronicle problems of so-
cietal order in a half-built civilization on the frontier. See Tompkins, West of
Everything, 227–28.
        3. In a pluralistic view of human values, Kekes writes, “Possibilities are
seen as being good or evil depending on the effects their realization has or would
have on us human beings. And these effects are benefits that we may enjoy or
harm we may suffer” (15).
        4. The only two fictional phenomena to match The Godfather in both popu-
larity and cultural staying power are Uncle Tom’s Cabin and Gone with the Wind.
Stowe’s novel raises the horrifying spectre of slavery at the root of the Southern
family but also lets all parties off the hook by stating that God will end slavery’s
evil in his own good time. Mitchell provides a recovery narrative for an America
in the teeth of a depression in the 1930s while writing stock Southern Reconstruc-
tion history. She also provides both an emancipated businesswoman in Scarlett
as well as an impossible romantic heroine: one who is frigid and who chases the
wrong man for over 850 pages before her epiphany. Both novels describe women’s
empowerment but give it no real currency in life-world affairs.
        5. Bakhtin corroborates this logic when he speaks of “the absolute hege-
mony of myth over language.” He describes “mythlogical thinking” as a substi-
tute for the “connections and interrelationships of reality itself.” (The Dialogic
Imagination, 369).
        6. I am adapting Barthes’ system of signification to fictional discourse here
without a real analysis of the implications of this shift to creative language. How
the fictional act mediates or changes the dynamics of this pattern is a subject in
itself. For my purposes, I assume that character zones are where fiction funda-
mentally happens.
        7. Since Mythologies, much more work has been done on reader response
and on social discourses speaking without subjects, influenced by the work of
Foucault. Differing ideological views in America on how the FBI and commu-
nism worked together in a symbolic symbiotic relationship are advanced, as
well as analyses of how communism itself has “failed” as a threat. Woltz may
seem a Cold War period piece as well as a bit clownish c. 2000. In fact he may
resemble not Fanucci, the Don’s first victim (a cool old flamboyant bird) but the
                                Notes to Chapter 5                                307



landlord who terrified, comes to see young Vito after telling him to get lost—
who the hell are you?—in his splenetic lack of control and subsequent nervous
contrition when he learns the truth of Vito Corleone’s new neighborhood men-
ace through murder.
           8. See Kekes’ discussion of such procedural values, which include “distribu-
tive justice,” “human rights,” “equality,” and “freedom,” in chapter 11, “Some Politi-
cal Implications of Pluralism: The Conflict with Liberalism” 199–217.
           9. Don Corleone’s enemy Phillip Tattaglia, is similarly discredited as child
molester. Just before he is murdered on Michael’s orders, Phillip Tattaglia, sev-
enty years old and naked as a baby, stood over a bed on which lay a young
girl. . . . Rocco pumped four bullets into him, all in the belly” (430).
         10. The only other direct cry against Don Corleone’s authority comes from
Kay after Michael has explained his father’s “ethics.” She asks him, “What if
everybody felt the same way? How could society ever function, we’d be back in
the times of the cavemen” (365). Kay, too, is an outsider in the Corleone world.
Female and powerless in Puzo’s conception, she is Michael’s property, much like
Woltz’s horse. Kay is also part of a gesturing toward a residual Protestant ethic
that Puzo only sketches out.
         11. In contrast to the suppressed institutionalized church, Ferraro has
pointed out that The Godfather is intricately “organized around the sacramental
activities for which Italians are renowned . . .” (Ferraro “ ‘My Way’ in ‘Our
America’ ” 512).
         12. The basic primers in such studies would include Rabinowitz, Before
Reading; Booth, The Company We Keep; Hutcheon, Irony’s Edge; and Smith, Contin-
gencies of Value.
         13. Yet in a firm symbiosis, by finding value and key clues to Puzo’s talent
and temperament in Michael’s ethnic and family refusal is to practice the same
negation in another semantic row that Barthes’ mythologist found to be the critic’s
melancholy task when he exposes the heart of the falsely totalizing popular
narrative. The refusals are in massive distaste, a refusal that leaves the writer
and reader-critic at the heart of the aesthetic-ethical debate with no clear
road home.
         14. In the realm of “Khartoum studies,” note how in Godfather II, a drugged
and bewildered Senator Pat Geary of Nevada finds a raped and murdered girl
in a well of blood in his bed and is convinced by the Corleones that he killed
her and that they are his only protection against exposure. Senator Geary had
gravely insulted Michael Corleone and didn’t get the message, as Woltz had
not. The primal violation of young girl as animal results. She is not only
Khartoum but Woltz’s twelve-year-old starlet victimized again. For the origin
of Khartoum’s head in Woltz’s bed, Puzo may be referencing the 1884 murder
and beheading of General George Gordon, the British colonial hero who fell
during the siege of Khartoum in the Sudan. His head was put in a handkerchief
and displayed before passing tribesmen who spit and cursed at it. Gordon’s
death shattered the myth of British invincibility in East Africa; his powerful
aura and national affiliations did not save him any more than Woltz’s connec-
tions saved his horse.
308                    The Godfather and American Culture


       15. To patiently go on symbolic reading and linking expeditions in popular
fiction and repeatedly end up “no place” is not to say the trip isn’t worthwhile.
Such journeying may be the only way to test out the author’s conceptual skill
and literary intelligence. What Ferraro calls “brilliantly anti-masculinist” and
“surreally gynophobic,” for example, in Puzo’s writing about women (“My Way”
517), I still see as childishly sexist to no consistent pattern, that real shaping by
Puzo is wishful thinking. Coppola pointedly excised Lucy Mancini, the overaged
starlets, and Johnny’s daughters from his 1972 film. Did he do so because the
material was too awful or too explosive? I suggest the former, though Ferraro’s
lauding of the presentation of The Godfather’s women is certain to launch a new
critical dialogue about Puzo.
       16. Consider the enormous power of Marlow in Heart of Darkness, telling
the Intended of Kurtz, “He died saying your name.” Such is the bond established
between Marlow and the reader in which Marlow equates the Intended with the
novel’s deepest darkness. “The horror, the horror” equals herself: European senti-
mental idealism, incarnated in woman’s idolatry and “belief” that masquerades
as love and Marlow thus identifies in his misogynistic displacement.
       17. It would be fair to hold elite fiction to the same “policing” standards
and not rush to call them “works for the ages” without the same ideological and
formal scrutiny.


        Chapter 6. The Godfather and Melodrama:
      Authorizing the Corleones as American Heroes

       1. While Cawelti was one of the first critics to take The Godfather seriously
for genre study in Adventure, Mystery, and Romance, he ascribed it to the evolution
of the crime story while he reserved what he called “best-selling social melo-
drama” for the likes of Irving Wallace, Jacqueline Susann, and Harold Robbins.
I believe Puzo in The Godfather to be the most powerful melodramatist.
       2. Dreiser allows the softer, dreamier Puzo to be seen as opposed to the
tough guy Norman Mailer, whom Puzo both envied and disliked in his style and
success (see chapter 2).
       3. The Man in the Grey Flannel Suit (1955) actually includes a melodramatic
Italian subplot as World War II veteran Tom Rath must decide to do the right
thing by an Italian woman with whom he has had a wartime romance and
child—and how to tell his wife in Connecticut.
       4. Stephen Neale has commented that melodrama often suggests a crisis of
the social order but concludes with an “in-house rearrangement” of that order
rather than any radical restructuring” (Ashley 109).
       5. There’s a whole novel here in the absent details of a figure such as a
Joseph P. Kennedy in the interlocking of crime, business, and statesmanship, the
potential interactions with real world capitalists, American down and outers,
provisional socialists, New Deal bureaucrats, beleaguered bankers and business-
men. That text was written by Dos Passos among others; Puzo tells but does not
show. He has neither the patience nor the inclination to let such detail work slow
his melodrama for long.
                               Notes to Chapter 7                             309



        6. When Puzo was imagining the destined Corleones (1969), his elite litera-
ture doppelgänger Mailer wrote impressionistically of American WASPS themselves
“emerging from human history in order to take us to the stars” (Of a Fire on the
Moon 280). Such was Mailer’s manichean conception of the space program that he
did not know whether these explorers (immigrants?) exemplified the best that was
in us or the devil’s own blapshemous reach to the stars. Mailer’s brilliant nonfic-
tion reporting the 1960s and 1970s is decidedly melodramatic and draws heavily
on notions of the individual and collective American destinies. For Mailer in a
prophetic mode threaded into a national literary conversation over the the last two
centuries, see Banta, Failure and Success in America.
        7. Long suggests that success novels may be set in “pure and fabulous”
form as historical novels or “novels about religion” (64).
        8. Women can’t “go bad” in a positive sense. The designation would only
connote “whore” or “adultress” and a loss of moral nature, not a move to a
higher or culturally approved state. There is no recovery for women or trium-
phant victory in a process of going bad; there are no female Robin Hoods.
        9. In the realm of recent American war films and “what we’re fighting
for,” note Saving Private Ryan (1998) for one of the more melodramatic examples,
The Thin Red Line (1998) for one of the more austere.
       10. Even the kitchen is colonized in Coppola’s Godfather I. Clemenza stands
over a pot of pasta sauce, telling “Mikey” his favorite recipe lovingly and in
detail. His apron, his rotund stature, his at-home ease all suggest that he’s con-
noted as convivially female and in his element. Why does Michael need to know
such arts? Because some day he might have to cook while the men “take to the
mattresses,” the mob family equivalent of manning a temporary safehouse from
which they go forth to do mayhem.


     Chapter 7. The Corleones as “Our Gang”:
 The Godfather Interrogated by Doctorow’s Ragtime

       1. Such a conversion from “Andolini “ to “Corleone” signifies the end of
of the Andolini family in Sicily through murder and emigration, and Vito’s pre-
history is closed down. Yet “Corleone” brands him ever closer to Sicily. Michael
Corleone will lose a Sicilian family yet again with the death of his new wife,
Apollonia. Puzo kept repeating this dynamic as the Andolini/Corleones cycle
back and forth through their descent culture’s tragedies and vendettas. I’m in-
debted to Dina Bozicas and her paper, “Never on the Outside: Mario Puzo’s
Sicilianization of an American Hero.”
       2. Doctorow joins Puzo in writing a novel about an American gangster in
Billy Bathgate, an account of Dutch Schultz written by the “capable” and inscru-
table boy Billy who tells the Schultz gang’s story from an anonymous and powerful
position that he has attained in American society after sequestering a large part
of the gang members’ fortune at the time of their brutal assassination. For
Doctorow, Billy himself is a historicized Jay Gatsby, who survives and becomes
an inheritor. Dutch Schultz is a demystified and horrifying Don Corleone. Billy’s
310                   The Godfather and American Culture


comment on destiny is that “the world worked by chance but every chance had
a prophetic heft to it” (29), the promise that Little Boy has intuited in Ragtime.
In a more pragmatic moment, Billy sums up a boy’s life in mob narrative:
“What I was in was a thrilling state of three-dimensional danger, I was in
danger of myself, and in danger of my mentor, and in danger of what he was
in danger of, which was a business life of murdering danger; and out beyond
all that were the cops. Four dimensions” (39). Billy in maturity has become a
powerful figure in that “general American family,” perhaps a tycoon or govern-
ment official, but he does not reveal his identity to the reader and remains
inscrutably assimilated.
       3. In Ragtime, Doctorow shows what happens when Coalhouse Walker cuts
all his ties with the larger society and does not move in “happy savage honor”
but is cut down in miscomprehension and horrible violence, including his own.
Doctorow shows how Coalhouse’s story moves past its myth toward his “philo-
sophical destiny.” In another vein familiar to The Godfather, Coalhouse demon-
strates that when Amercican society can identify a true sacrificial victim, it will
swiftly act on the maxim that “there couldn’t be any kind of world if people acted
that way.” Coalhouse gets no dispensation to go bad; he merely becomes bad.


       Chapter 8. The American Inadvertent Epic:
                 The Godfather Copied

       1. John McWilliams has commented that as early as 1805, Robert Southey
had called the epic “degraded,” and in 1812, an anonymous critic said the epic
“seldom succeeds, unless in a barbarous or semibarbarous age” (117). Tradition-
ally critics have wanted to reserve “epic” “for the best, the highest, and the most
comprehensive of literry artifacts” (3).
       2. See Shirley Samuels, Romances of the Republic, for intricate analyses of
this visual and verbal iconography.
       3. This passage of an American symbology over two centuries is in the
realistic historical vein. The American Renaissance and modernist texts work
mightily to subvert this more mainstream and normative tale.
       4. Darby comments that Leon Uris’s Exodus (1958) and James Michener’s
Hawaii (1959) urge that the individual derives meaning and identity primarily
from his social setting, which in turn is amalgam of historical experiences grounded
in religion and geography (93). Region and place matter in popular fiction and
go against the grain of Ohmann’s “personal illness” narrative, which is inward
and private.
       5. Fiedler comments on a distinguishing feature of popular art being its
ability to move from one medium to another without loss of intensity or alter-
ation of meaning: “its independence in short of the form in which it is first
rendered” (What Was Literature 40). It’s worth noting that the film and television
adaptations of Peyton Place were relatively undistinguished, and as a result, the
novel went out of print for many years and became known as something of a
1950s period piece without a sustaining and alternate media life.
       6. Some of Puzo’s other screen credits include Superman, Earthquake, and
The Cotton Club (directed by Coppola).
                               Notes to Chapter 9                              311



        7. There’s more than a hint that Puzo resurrected Nino Valenti for Astorre
Viola’s tougher job of being a doubly blessed Don’s son. The FBI agent’s wife
tells him, “You remind me of a young Dean Martin” and “Astorre was delighted.
‘Thank you,’ he said. ‘He’s my hero. I know his entire catalogue of songs by
heart’ ” (149).
        8. Chase in The Sopranos pays homage to Puzo’s last literary effort and
perhaps to his passing. In the first show of the third season, Tony brings Omerta
to his mother, Livia, to read. It’s the last time he sees her before her death.
        9. Scorsese wanted to pick up on Nicholas Pileggi in Wise Guy (1985),
who reworked the reminiscences of Henry Hill in nonfiction.
       10. Chase memorably concludes the second show of The Sopranos’ third
season with Tony watching the end of The Public Enemy on his VCR just after
the disastrous and depressing wake for his mother held at the Soprano home.
Gangster Tommy Powers (Cagney) is to arrive home from the hospital at his
sainted Irish mother’s front door. While she sings “I’m Forever Blowing Bubbles”
to herself as she fluffs his pillows in anticipation for his homecoming, his brother
opens the door to Tommy’s mummified dead body that falls in the door toward
the camera; rival mobsters have done him in and gift-wrapped him. Tony
wipes a single tear from his eye; the contrast with his own monster of a dead
mother and his still very tenuous hold on life are clear to him. Chase has
commented that watching this scene from the movie as a kid was “the most
frightening thing [he’d] ever seen” (Fresh Air, National Public Radio, March 9,
2001 interview).
       11. See Lopez, for the most complete run-down of mobster films.
       12. Thomas Ferraro has written on Prizzi’s Honor as a real contender with
The Godfather in mob narrative. See Ferraro “Blood in the Marketplace” 199–207.
       13. In postmodern America, the mob is as likely to copy the fictional texts.
Lentricchia writes, “I saw an elegantly dressed elderly man, utterly manicured,
a shave every four hours, a haircut every five days, who would occasionally walk
outside to talk to youngish guys built like bulls in flowered shirts, with enve-
lopes in their hands who kissed him on the cheek when they left. It was a movie,
post-Godfather. They knew they were in a movie; they were enjoying themselves
in the movie” (“The Edge of Night” 30).
       14. The tip of the iceberg would include Godfathers Pizza, an oldies record
collection of Italian American crooners called Mob Hits, a short story collection
entitled Take the Cannoli (2000), and a rock band in Boston called “Luca Brasi.”
Johnny Depp gives a rhetoric lesson on the multiple meanings of “fuhgedabowdit”
in Donnie Brasco.



  Chapter 9. The Godfather Sung by The Sopranos

     1. Sammy “The Bull” Gravano served five years in prison, was released,
and ultimately left the witness protection program. As of July 2000, he sat in a
Phoenix jail on $5 million bail for supplying area clubs with the drug ecstasy.
     2. In Gay Talese’s Honor Thy Father (1971), Bill Bonanno of the Bonanno
crime family already felt in the early 1970s on reading The Godfather that “the
312                    The Godfather and American Culture


Sicilians described in [the novel] were endowed with impressive amounts of
courage and honor, traits that [he] was convinced were fast deteriorating in the
brotherhood” (312).
         3. Paulie is not always so literal. He provides a great critique of Starbucks
and designer coffee houses when he despairs that Italian-born drinks such as
espresso and cappuccino are now the province of yuppies and non-Italians; he’s
disgusted with the legitimacy and tameness of the whole affair—but manages to
cop a coffee mug before he walks out.
         4. My sources tell me that Christopher uses a dialect version of bucchaccio,
which sounds more like booc yock and which means “filthy hole.”
         5. What the audience knows includes Imperioli’s memorable minor role
in Scorsese’s Goodfellas, as the young gang go-fer whom Joe Pesci first shoots in
the foot when annoyed and then annihilates in a memorable spasm of violence.
Chase references Imperioli’s career in the mob film genre when “Christopher”
gets partial “revenge” by shooting a bakery guy in the foot when he doesn’t
move fast enough to suit him.
         6. Favreau’s fine work in the episode shows a willingness to extend him-
self and his genre-persona beyond his role in Swingers where he was a younger
and sadder Albert Brooks. Like Michael Imperioli who plays Christopher, Favreau
is a writer-actor divining the Hollywood genre game and they both play writer-
actors in this episode.
         7. When Christopher finally insists that “you cannot use that story [of the
transsexual], do you want to see me clipped?” he adds, plaintively, “you were
just gonna leave?” “I really liked you.” To which Amy responds, “It’s getting
kind of William Inge here,” putting up her barrier of a cinematic trivial pursuit
tactic to defuse any possible primary feeling. Finally her corporate identity achieves
verbal domination, when, without a final comeback for him, she screams, “Ex-
cuse me! I’m a vice president, you fucking asshole.”
         8. Gina Frangello has commented to the author, “[Christopher is] stand-
ing there with a foot in two generations, immobilized. It’s fascinating, watching
this young man try to act out a part of his cultural collective consciousness (the
Mafia belief system) while also chasing his generation’s collective consciousness
(the movie star).”
         9. Tony is surprised to learn that his father, too, periodically collapsed or
blacked out but that Johnny Boy’s boys had let it go or called it “a condition.”
        10. See Thomas Schatz, “The Family Melodrama,” in Landy, Imitations of
Life, 162–65.
        11. Fitzgerald in Tender Is the Night (1935) and Nabokov in Lolita (1958)
firmly established movie love and Freudian love to be the intertwined expres-
sions of modern desire in their representational narrative form and showed how
deeply implicated Hollywood was in the production of making sense of Freud’s
“family romance.” Fitzgerald provided the nightmare image of “Daddy’s Girl”
for Rosemary Hoyt and Nicole Warren Diver, before the father, Dick Diver, who
would be all things to all women. Lolita, child of the movies, will be twice
abducted, once by the romantic pedophile, Humbert, and then by Clare Quilty,
the director who will star her in porn flicks.
                               Notes to Chapter 9                              313



       12. When Bill Bonanno is sentenced by a judge to four years in prison for
credit card fraud, much of Melfi’s American umbrage at Tony is evident in his
remarks: “You are not the product of a ghetto. I don’t see that because of the
family relationships. . . . you were under any great handicap. . . . You could have
gotten a job. There was no need to do what you did.” (Talese 471).
       13. A case might be made that Kay Adams Corleone in Godfather II is
radically intervening in mob life and that of the Corleones by unilaterally decid-
ing to abort her unborn son with Michael, declaring that “this Sicilian thing must
end.” However, Kay is more desperate, without authority, personal or cultural,
and for her stand is denied any contact with her children by Michael. Also, how
the abortion squares with Kay’s conversion to Catholicism in both novel and first
Godfather film is puzzling.
       14. Michaels concludes that it’s pluralism itself that causes such identities
to become tautologically explicable, that in pluralism we begin by affirming “who
we are,” which is understood as “prior to questions of what we do” (14–15).
       15. I’m indebted to Marina Lewis for this point.
       16. Puzo in The Godfather had Mama Corleone and Kay pray only for the
Don and Michael, never for themselves and their children.
       17. Mimi White comments that marriage on TV is a site of disruption rather
than narrative closure as it often is in movies. Allen, Channels of Discourse, 193.
       18. Cawelti speaks of the social melodrama of 1900 where an “aggressive
social heroine’s” woman’s role was to bring back a “morallly revitalized man” to
a “truer spirituality and loving relationship,” Cawelti in Landy (42). Such would
be Carm’s traditional way in The Sopranos.
       19. Don DeLillo has his protagonist Nick Shay in Underworld (1997) say of
his Italian American boyhood in the Bronx in the 1950s, that

      I long for the days of disorder. I want them back, the days when I
      was alive on the earth, rippling in the quick of my skin, heedless and
      real. I was dumb-muscled and angry and real. This is what I long for,
      the breach of peace, the days of disarray when I walked real streets
      and did things slap-bang and felt angry and ready all the time, a
      danger to others and a distant mystery to myself. (810)

       The persona of Nick Shay’s teenage lament is precisely the character and
role that Tony Soprano inhabits in his own present and that The Sopranos would
hypothetically wean him from.
       20. Lentricchia in Johnny Critelli crafts such a passage in mutual knowledge
of its play, suggesting perhaps a truer give-and-take in the Italian American
family battle between mother and son: “When I was a child, my mother said, If
you say bad words I’ll make this sewing needle get hot on the stove and sew
your tongue to your lips. I’m going to put a nail through your tongue. She was
trying to stifle a smile. I was trying to stifle a giggle” (31).
       21. Chase has said that Livia is based on his late mother, Norma.
       22. Barzini wrote about Italian sons: “Nothing should be spared to pro-
duce them. Everything is done for them in Italy. They are the protagonists of
314                    The Godfather and American Culture


Italian life. Their smallest wishes are satisfied.” (Tom Hundley, “Apron Strings
Holding Firm in Italy,” Chicago Tribune, May 11, 2000). Since Barzini also com-
ments that “Jesus Christ shares, in Italy, His supreme place with His mother, on
almost equal footing” (Barzini 204), the battlelines are drawn in a secularization
of this most venerated Mother and Son in Italian America.
       23. Livia Soprano was brilliantly played by the late Nancy Marchand who
died in June 2000. Her role was already greatly diminished in the show’s second
season because of her illness. In the first episode of season three in March 2001,
Chase technologically reembodied Marchand as Livia for an awkward last scene
with Tony before Livia’s death. Any further revelations of Livia’s pathology and
power will have to come through flashbacks to Tony’s youth.
       24. Tony is constantly kept off balance in such moments. Earlier after sav-
aging him to his face, Livia comes up close to him and says softly, “I suppose
you’re not going to kiss me.” He literally flees down the steps of her house from
this oddly incestuous moment, trips, and his gun falls out. As he scrambles to put
it back in his pocket. Livia titters and slowly closes her front door, having re-
duced Tony to a child yet again.
       25. Mary Ann Doane comments that pathos can be conceived of as “a kind
of textual rape” (Landy 304).
       26. Interim boss Jackie Aprile died of cancer in the show’s second season,
while the “big” boss languishes in prison. Uncle Junior, a potential rival to Tony,
never had the right stuff in his prime and remains a dangerous but largely inef-
fective aging irritant.
       27. In contrast to The Godfather, Chase really depicts the everyday violent
economics of the Soprano family, its infrastructure, handling of money, and bru-
talizing of lower-life associates. Tony is a working man. Vito and Michael Corleone
were executive bankers by comparison.
       28. Is it a coincidence for Chase that The Sopranos/The Simpsons, contempo-
rary television’s most intelligent family dramas, both begin with S and contain
the same number of letters?
       29. The Waltons’s call-and-response ending is perhaps copied from James
Agee’s writing of the softly whispered family “goodnights” on the Gudger porch
in the most moving 1930s chronicle, Let Us Now Praise Famous Men (1941). Eco-
nomically, the Waltons were the Beverly Hillbillies in comparison to Agee’s blasted
tenant farmers. Agee knew a thing or two about sentiment.
       30. May it be too much to suggest that Chase, a true son of New Jersey, has
named Meadow Soprano for the lovely and famed “Meadowlands?”
       31. Late in The Sopranos’ second season, Tony finally goes to his office after
his lawyer suggests he might want to give an occasional appearance of legiti-
macy to the feds who are hounding him; the office managers have to clear away
boxes and boxes of stuff (they’ve been using Tony’s digs as a storeroom) and
introduce him to the office staff.
       32. See Ian Eng, “Dallas and the Melodramatic Imagination,” in Landy
473–96; Sasha Torres, “Melodrama, Masculinity, and the Family,” Camera Obscura
19 (January 1989), 86–106.
       33. Chase does plant some literary visuals with a purpose. Carmela is seen
in bed reading both the Bible and Arthur Golden’s Memoirs of a Geisha, the Bible
                             Notes to the Conclusion                             315



when she asks Tony to get a vasectomy, Memoirs, just before she seduces him and
asks that they try for another child. Melfi in bed reads T. Coraghessan Boyle’s
Riven Rock, the tale of an utterly mad husband propped up for decades by a
platoon of psychiatrists and attendants; he has a morbid fascination with and
violent hatred of women, particularly his mother and wife.
        34. Falcone was an eight-night CBS mini-series modeled on the film Donnie
Brasco and broadcast in March and April 2000 about an FBI agent going deep
inside the mob. The audience could cling to the security of a law enforcement
agent in an assumed role, while never having to worry about his true colors as
they reveled in the mob mayhem. The USA cable series Cover Me debuted in
April 2000 as a lightweight mix of a Falcone and The Sopranos’ family feel and
flair. Both husband and wife are undercover agents in darkest suburbia with three
kids. They move around the United States in different identities and can become
Jewish or “golfers” or “San Diegoans” for an hour, getting close to their quarry
in ridiculously easy fashion on the model of Charlie’s Angels. Mom’s first seen in
deep “uncover” as a fledgling Bada Bing girl writhing around a pole. The “Cover
Me” logo leading into commercial breaks shows five little dark blue FBI strap
undershirts on a backyard clothesline. The series is narrated by a Fred Savage
“Wonder Years” voice-over of one of the Cover Me children. Cover Me appears to
be lite parody in the guise of naive copying. The show’s creator is Shaun Cassidy,
and the first episode was directed by Tony (Wally Cleaver) Dow. A Cover Me kid
intones, “By now, we’re all on the team.” Ain’t it the truth.
        35. The competition was won in the second season by Junior Soprano, who
mused immortally, “I got the FBI so far up my ass they can smell Brylcreem.”
        36. At this point, it’s clear that when I say “Chase” in my analysis, I’m also
shorthanding a term that stands for a large number of creative hands. The Sopra-
nos lists eleven directors and eight writers in the first two seasons of twenty-six
episodes, with many of these personnel doubling as producers. Such an en-
semble team working in tandem on a tight schedule obviously bears further
investigation. Do different writers work on versions of episodes? Do some writ-
ers specialize in writing for specific characters? Is there a particular thematic or
verbal/visual style to certain writers or directors in the series? Or is all homog-
enized under David Chase’s vision?
        37. Chase stated that he did “a sudden u-turn” at the end of The Sopranos’
second season, when he’d planned to end with Tony more strongly realizing that
he was his own worst enemy, that he had no excuses for what he was, but that
suddenly Chase “got tired of moralizing,” thought “that’s enough for now,” and
felt it more necessary to remind the audience that Tony was a mobster and a “very
scary man” (Fresh Air interview March 9, 2001). We can see how Chase himself re-
creates the audience’s swing back and forth in identifying with or against Tony,
rooting for his rehabilitation but still both admiring and fearing him.


                                  Conclusion

     1. Fisher remarks that we haven’t truly begun to explore the “long history
of money and speculation in America” (“American Literary and Cultural Stud-
316                    The Godfather and American Culture


ies” 234). Such eras as the Civil War, Gilded Age, Populist Era, and Progressive
Era remain unacknowledged in any American fictional tradition, nor do more
recent twentieth-century periods get their due. Tom Wolfe provides the closest
look at recent American money and its mores in popular fiction in The Bonfire of
the Vanities and A Man in Full.
       2. An occasional exception proves the rule, however. At the Dons’ conven-
tion, Don Corleone rises to say, “[W]e will manage our world for ourselves be-
cause it is our world, cosa nostra. . . . Otherwise they will put the ring in our nose
as they have put the ring in the nose of all the millions of Neapolitans and other
Italians in this country” (293).
       3. As Fredo has no one else to be when Mike reads him out of the family
in Godfather II, telling him that since he has betrayed the family, he doesn’t want
to see him or know what he does, that he does not want to be present when he
visits their mother. When she dies, Mike gives a chilling nod at the wake to Al
Neri that it’s time to put Fredo’s execution in motion.
       4. Other identities that The Sopranos comments on are the childhood abuse
narrative and the repressed memory narrative. Tony Soprano in the show’s third
season is tracking back through a Proust-inspired catalyst of an Italian salami to
memories of his father chopping off a butcher’s finger for not making weekly
payments linked to his mother’s almost sensual desire for bloody red meat on
the dinner table.
       5. Torgovnick writes, “The ‘I’ marks experiences, life histories, emotions,
and beliefs. The ‘we’ marks positions, group identifications and allegiances: it
can galvanize people for positive goals; it does not need to be pinched” (149).
       6. Gordon and Newfield comment that “pluralism itself is under more
scrutiny as the racial ideology of a minority white culture.” (397).
                           Works Cited


Adorno, Theodor W. “On Epic Naivete.” [1943]. Notes to Literature. Vol. 1. New
     York: Columbia University Press, 1991. 24–29.
Allen, Robert C., ed. Channels of Discourse: Television and Contemporary Criticism.
      Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 1987.
Ashley, Bob. The Study of Popular Fiction: A Source Book. Philadelphia: University
     of Pennsylvania P. 1989.
Austen, Jane. Pride and Prejudice. [1813]. New York: Penguin, 1985.
Bakhtin, M. M. The Dialogic Imagination. Ed. Michael Holquist. Trans. Caryl
     Emerson, Michael Holquist. Austin: U of Texas P, 1981.
———. Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics. Ed. and Trans. Caryl Emerson. Minneapo-
   lis: U of Minnesota P, 1984.
Baier, Annette C. A Progress of Sentiments: Reflections on Hume’s Treatise. Cam-
       bridge: Harvard UP, 1991.
Banta, Martha. Failure and Success in America: A Literary Debate. Princeton: Princeton
      UP, 1978.
Barnes, Elizabeth. States of Sympathy: Seduction and Democracy in the American
     Novel. New York: Columbia UP, 1997.
Barone, Michael. “Italian Americans and American Politics.” Beyond The Godfa-
     ther. Ed. A. Kenneth Ciongoli, Jay Parini. 241–46.
Barthes, Roland. Mythologies. [1955]. Trans. Annette Lavers. New York: Hill &
      Wang, 1972.
———. S/Z. [1970] Trans. Richard Miller. New York: Hill & Wang, 1974.
Barzini, Luigi. The Italians. [1964]. New York: Touchstone, 1996.
Baym, Nina. “Melodramas of Beset Manhood: How Theories of American Fiction
    Exlude Women Authors.” [1982]. Criticism: Major Statements. Ed. Charles
    Kaplan, William Davis Anderson. New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2000.
    586–602.
Baynes, Kenneth. The Normative Grounds of Social Criticism. Albany: State U of
     New York P, 1992.
Beckett, Samuel. The Unnamable. London: Calder & Boyars, 1975.
Bellow, Saul. Dangling Man. [1944]. New York: Meridian, 1960.

                                        317
 318                   The Godfather and American Culture


Bernstein, Richard J. “Pragmatism, Pluralism, and the Healing of Wounds.” Prag-
      matism: A Reader. Ed. Louis Menand. New York: Vintage, 1997.
Boelhower. William. “Adjusting Sites: The Italian-American Cultural Renaissance.”
     Adjusting Sites: New Essays in Italian American Studies. Ed. Boelhower, Rocco
     Pallone. Stony Brook, N.Y.: Forum Italicum, 1999: 57–71.
———. Through a Glass Darkly: Ethnic Semiosis in American Literature. New York:
   Oxford UP, 1987.
Booth, Wayne. The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction. Berkeley: U of Califor-
     nia P, 1988.
———. A Rhetoric of Irony. Chicago: U. of Chicago P., 1974.
Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Trans.
     Richard Nice. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1984.
———. The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. Ed. Randal
   Johnson. New York: Columbia UP, 1993.
Bromley, Roger. Lost Narratives: Popular Fictions, Politics and Recent History. Lon-
     don: Routledge, 1988.
———.”Natural Boundaries: The Social Function of Popular Fiction.” In The Study
   of Popular Fiction. Ed. Ashley. 147–55.
Brooks, Peter. The Melodramatic Imagination: Balzac, Henry James, Melodrama, and
     the Mode of Excess. New Haven: Yale UP, 1976.
Brown, Gillian. Domestic Individualism: Imagining Self in Nineteenth Century America.
     Berkeley: U of California P, 1990.
Cahan, Abraham. The Rise of David Levinsky. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1917.
Canavan, Francis. The Pluralist Game: Pluralism, Liberalism, and the Moral Con-
     science. London: Rowman & Littlefield, 1995.
Carroll, Noel E. A Philosophy of Mass Art. New York: Oxford UP, 1998.
Carter, Bill. “HBO Wants to Make Sure You Notice.” The New York Times on The
      Sopranos. New York: ibooks, 2000: 93–98.
———. “He Engineered a Mob Hit, and Now It’s Time to Pay Up. The New York
   Times on The Sopranos: 83–90.
Cassidy, John. “The Fountainhead.” The New Yorker. April 24 and May 1, 2000:
      162–75.
Cawelti, John G. Adventure, Mystery, and Romance: Formula Stories as Art and Popu-
     lar Culture. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1976.
Caygill, Howard. The Art of Judgement. New York: Blackwell, 1989.
Chase, Richard. The American Novel and its Tradition. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1957.
Ciongoli, Kenneth, and Jay Parini ed. Beyond The Godfather: Italian American
     Writers on the Real Italian American Experience. Hanover N.H.: UP of New
     England, 1997.
                                    Works Cited                                 319



Conrad, Joseph. Victory. [1915]. New York: Oxford UP, 1986.
Coppola. Francis Ford. The Godfather. 1972.
———. The Godfather Part II. 1974.
———. The Godfather Part III. 1990.
Cvetkovich, Ann. Mixed Feelings: Feminism, Mass Culture, and Victorian Sensation-
     alism. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1992.
Darby, William. Necessary American Fictions: Popular Literature of the 1950s. Bowl-
     ing Green, Oh.: Bowling Green State U Popular P, 1987.
Day, Clarence. Life with Father. New York: Knopf, 1935.
DeLillo, Don. End Zone. [1972]. New York: Pocket Editions, 1973.
———. “Interview with Don DeLillo.” Contemporary Literature. 3, 1 (Winter 1982):
   19–37.
———. Underworld. New York: Scribner’s, 1997.
Dickens, Charles. Bleak House. [1853]. New York: Signet Classics, 1980.
di Donato, Pietro. Christ in Concrete. 1939. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966.
Dixon, Thomas W. The Clansman. 1905. New York: Gordon, 1975.
Doctorow, E. L. “The Beliefs of Writers.” Jack London: 103–17.
———. Billy Bathgate. New York: Random House, 1989
———. “Jack London and His Call of the Wild.” Jack London: 1–21.
———. Jack London, Hemingway, and the Constitution: Selected Essays 1977–1992.
   [1993]. New York: Harper Perennial, 1994.
———. Ragtime. [1976]. New York: Plume, 1996.
———. “Theodore Dreiser: Book One and Book Two.” Jack London: 21–39.
Dreiser, Theodore. A Book About Myself. [1922]. New York: Boni & Liveright
      1926.
———. The Financier. [1912]. New York: Meridian, 1995.
———. Sister Carrie. [1900]. New York: Bantam, 1982.
Douglas, Lloyd C. The Robe. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1942.
Eagleton, Terry. Criticism and Ideology. London: Verso, 1978.
Ellis, John. Visible Fictions. London: Routledge, 1982.
Fante, John. Wait until Spring, Bandini. New York: Stackpole Sons, 1938.
Farred, Grant. “Engame Identity? Mapping the New Left Roots of Identity Poli-
      tics.” New Literary History 31, 4 (Autumn 2000): 627–48.
Faulkner, William. Absalom, Absalom! New York: Random House, 1936.
Feagin, Susan L. Reading with Feeling: The Aesthetics of Appreciation. Ithaca: Cornell
     UP, 1996.
 320                  The Godfather and American Culture


Ferraro. Thomas J. “Blood in the Marketplace: The Business of Family in the
      Godfather Narratives.” The Invention of Ethnicity. Ed. Sollors. 176–207.
———. “ ‘My Way’ in ‘Our America’: Art, Ethnicity, Profession.” American Liter-
   ary History. 12, 3 (Fall 2000): 499–522.
Fiedler, Leslie A. The Inadvertent Epic. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1980.
———. Love and Death in the American Novel. [1960]. New York: Meridian, 1962.
———. What Was Literature: Class, Culture, and Mass Society. New York: Simon &
   Schuster, 1980.
Fisher, Philip. “American Literary and Cultural Studies Since the Civil War.”
      Redrawing the Boundaries: The Transformation of English and American Studies.
      Ed. Stephen Greenblatt, Giles Gunn. New York: Modern Language Asso-
      ciation, 1992. 232–50.
———. Hard Facts: Setting and Form in the American Novel. New York: Oxford UP,
   1985.
———. “Introduction: The New American Studies.” The New American Studies:
   Essays from Representations. Ed. Fisher. Berkeley: U of California P, 1991.
   vii–xxii.
Flaubert, Gustave. Sentimental Education. Trans. Robert Baldick. Hammersmith,
     Middlesex: Penguin, 1964.
Fleming, Robert. “For Mario Puzo, a Spectacular Return to the Mafia World He
     Knows So Well.” www.bookpage.com. May 31, 2000.
Gambino, Richard. Blood of My Blood: The Dilemma of the Italian-Americans. Garden
    City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1974.
Gardaphe, Fred L. “Breaking and Entering: An Italian American’s Literary Odys-
     sey.” Forkroads: A Journal of Ethnic American Literature 1,1 (Fall 1995): 5–14.
———. Italian Signs, American Streets: The Evolution of Italian American Narrative.
   Durham: Duke UP, 1996.
Garrett, George. James Jones. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1984.
Gaut, Beryl. “The Ethical Criticism of Art.” Ed. Levinson, Aesthetics and Ethics:
      182–203.
Gelmis, Joseph. “Merciful Heavens, Is This the End of Don Corleone?” New York
     4, 34, August 23, 1971: 52–53.
Genette, Girard. Figures of Literary Discourse. New York: Columbia UP, 1982.
Gilbert, Sandra. “Mysteries of the Hyphen.” Beyond The Godfather. Ed. Ciongoli,
      Parini. 49–61.
Gilbreth, Frank B., and Ernestine Gilbreth Carey. Cheaper by the Dozen. New York:
      T. Y. Crowell, 1948.
Giordano, Paolo A. and Anthony Julian Tamburri, eds. Beyond the Margin: Read-
     ings in Italian Americana. Madison, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson, 1998.
                                    Works Cited                                 321



Glover, Jonathan. Humanity: A Moral History of the Twentieth Century. New Haven:
     Yale UP, 2000.
Gordon, Avery, and Christopher Newfield. “White Philosophy.” Identities. Ed.
     Kwame Anthony Appiah, Henry Louis Gates Jr. Chicago: U of Chicago P,
     1995. 380–400.
Gray, John. Enlightenment’s Wake: Politics and Culture at the Close of the Modern Age.
      London: Routledge, 1995.
Green, Rose Basile. The Italian-American Novel: A Document of the Interaction of Two
     Cultures. Cranbury, N.J.: Associated University Presses, 1974.
Griffith, D. W. Birth of a Nation. 1915.
Guillory, John. Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation. Chicago:
      U of Chicago P, 1993.
Gunn, Giles. Thinking across the American Grain: Ideology, Intellect, and the New
     Pragmatism. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1992.
Haley, Alex. Roots. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1976.
Harpham, Geoffrey Galt. Getting It Right: Language, Literature, and Ethics. Chicago:
     U of Chicago P, 1992.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel. “Young Goodman Brown.” Selected Tales and Sketches. New
    York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1962. 108–122.
Hemingway, Ernest. In Our Time. New York: Scribner’s 1925.
———. The Sun Also Rises. New York: Scribner’s, 1926.

Hume, David. An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals. [1751]. Ed. J.B.
    Schneewind. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983.

———. “Of the Standard of Taste.” [1757]. Critical Theory since Plato. Ed. Hazard
   Adams. Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1992. 308–315.

———. A Treatise of Human Nature. New York: Oxford UP, 1978.

Hutcheon, Linda. Irony’s Edge: The Theory and Politics of Irony. London: Routledge,
     1994.
Jameson, Fredric. Marxism and Form: Twentieth Century Dialectical Theories of Lit-
     erature. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1971.
———. The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act. Ithaca: Cornell
   UP, 1981.
———. “Postmodernism, or the Culture Logic of Late Capitalism.” New Left Review
   146: 52–92.
———. Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham, N.C.: Duke
   UP, 1991.
 322                   The Godfather and American Culture


———. “Reification and Utopia in Mass Culture.” Social Text 1, (1979): 130–48.
Jones, James. From Here to Eternity. New York: Scribner’s, 1951.
———. Some Came Running. New York: Scribner’s, 1957.
Joyce, James. A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. [1916]. New York: Viking, 1964.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Judgment. [1790] Trans. Werner S. Pluhar. Indianapo-
      lis: Hackett, 1987.
Kekes, John. The Morality of Pluralism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton UP, 1993.
Kemal, Salim. Kant’s Aesthetic Theory: An Introduction. New York: St. Martin’s,
    1992.
Keyser, Les. Martin Scorsese. New York: Twayne, 1992.
Krantz, Judith. Princess Daisy. New York: Crown, 1980.
Landy, Marcia, Ed. Imitations of Life: A reader on Film and Television Melodrama.
     Detroit: Wayne State UP, 1991.
Lears, T. J. Jackson. No Place of Grace: AntiModernism and the Transformation of
      American Culture. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1994.
Lentricchia, Frank. “The Edge of Night.” Beyond The Godfather. Ed. Ciongoli,
      Parini. 28–48.
———. Johnny Critelli; and the Knifemen: Two novels. New York: Scribner’s, 1996.
———. The Music of the Inferno. Albany: State U of New York P, 1999.
Leone, Sergio. Once upon a Time in America. 1984.
Levinson, Jerrold, ed. Aesthetics and Ethics: Essays at the Intersection. Cambridge:
     Cambridge UP, 1998.
Liman, Doug. Swingers. 1996.
Locke, John. An Essay concerning Human Understanding. [1690]. New York: Oxford
     UP, 1979.
London, Jack. The Call of the Wild. [1903]. New York: Vintage, 1990.
———. Martin Eden. [1909]. New York: Penguin, 1984.
Long, Elizabeth. The American Dream and the Popular Novel. Boston: Routledge &
     Kegan Paul, 1985.
Lopez, Daniel. Films by Genre. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1993.
Lopreato, Joseph. Italian Americans. New York: Random House, 1970.
Loriggio, Francesco. “On the Difficulty of Being an Italian-American Intellec-
     tual.” Adjusting Sites. Ed. Boelhower, Pallone. 125–51.
Lukacs, Georg. The Theory of the Novel. [1920]. Cambridge: MIT, 1971.
Lynn, Kenneth S. The Dream of Success. Boston: Little, Brown, 1955.
                                    Works Cited                                  323



Mailer, Norman. Advertisements for Myself. New York: Signet, 1959.
———. The Deer Park. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1955.
———. “The Time of Her Time.” In Advertisements. 427–51.
———. “The White Negro.” In Advertisements. 302–22.
Mangione, Jere. Mount Allegro. [1943]. New York: Harper & Row, 1989.
Manso, Peter. Mailer: His Life and Times. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1985.
Martin, Ronald E. American Literature and the Universe of Force. Durham N.C.:
     Duke UP, 1981.
Matthiessen, F. O. Theodore Dreiser. New York: William Sloane, 1951.
McShane, Frank. “Mario Puzo Dead at 78.” Associated Press release. July 2, 1999.
McWilliams, John P., Jr. The American Epic: Transforming a Genre 1770–1860. Cam-
    bridge: Cambridge UP, 1989.
Melville, Herman. Pierre; or, the Ambiguities. [1852]. New York: Hendricks House,
     1962.
Michaels, Walter Benn. Our America: Nativism, Modernism, and Pluralism. Durham,
     N.C.: Duke UP, 1995.
Miller, Toby. The Well-Tempered Self: Citizenship, Culture, and the Postmodern Subject.
      Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1993.
Mitchell, Margaret. Gone with the Wind. [1936]. New York: Warner, 1993.
Morison, Samuel Eliot. The Oxford History of the American People. New York: Oxford
     UP, 1965.
Nardini, Gloria. Che Bella Figura: The Power of Performance in an Italian Ladies’ Club
     in Chicago. Albany: State U of New York P, 1999.
Neale, Stephen. “Genre.” In The Study of Popular Fiction. Ed. Ashley. 107–12.
Norris, Frank. The Octopus. [1901]. New York: Penguin, 1986.
Nussbaum, Martha. Poetic Justice: The Literary Imagination and Public Life. Boston:
     Beacon, 1995.
Ohmann, Richard. “The Shaping of a Canon: U.S. Fiction, 1960–1975.” Critical
    Inquiry 10, 1 (September 1983): 199–223.
Palumbo-Liu, David. “Assumed Identities.” New Literary History. 31, 4 (Fall 2000):
     765–80.
Percy, Walker. The Moviegoer. [1961]. New York: Popular Library, 1961.
Pileggi, Nicholas. Wise Guy: Life in a Mafia family. New York: Simon & Schuster,
      1985.
Puzo, Mario. “Choosing A Dream: Italiana in Hell’s Kitchen.” The Godfather Pa-
     pers: 32–69.
 324                   The Godfather and American Culture


———. The Dark Arena. [1955]. New York: Dell, 1969.
———. Fools Die. New York: Signet, 1978.
———. The Fortunate Pilgrim. [1964]. New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1997.
———. The Godfather. [1969]. New York: Signet, 1978.
———. The Godfather Papers and Other Confessions. New York: Fawcett, 1972.
———. Inside Las Vegas. New York: Charter, 1977.
———. The Last Don. [1996]. New York: Ballantine Books, 1997.
———. “The Making of The Godfather.” The Godfather Papers: 32–69.
———. “Notes from an Unsuccessful Writer’s Diary.” The Godfather Papers: 233–
   48.
———. Omerta. New York: Random House, 2000.
———. The Sicilian. New York: Bantam, 1984.
———. “Writers, Talent, Money, Class.” The Godfather Papers: 81–88.
Pynchon, Thomas. The Crying of Lot 49. [1966]. New York: Harper & Row, 1986.
Rabinowitz, Peter. Before Reading: Narrative Conventions and the Politics of Interpre-
     tation. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1987.
Railton, Peter. “Aesthetic Value, Moral Value, and the Ambitions of Naturalism.”
      Ed. Levinson, Aesthetics and Ethics. 59–105.
Rand, Ayn. Atlas Shrugged. New York: Random House, 1957.
———. The Fountainhead. New York: New American Library, 1943.
Riesman, David. The Lonely Crowd. New Haven: Yale UP, 1950.
Robbins, Harold. The Carpetbaggers. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1961.
Rorty, Richard. Truth and Progress: Philosophical Papers, Volume 3. Cambridge:
      Cambridge UP, 1998.
Roth, Philip. Goodbye, Columbus. [1959]. New York: Bantam, 1963.
Roulston, Helen. “Opera in Gangster Movies.” Journal of Popular Culture (Summer
     1998): 102–11.
Samuels, Shirley. Romances of the Republic: Women, Family, and Violence in the Lit-
    erature of the Early American Nation. New York: Oxford, 1996.
Scorsese, Martin. Goodfellas. 1990.
Sen, Amartya. “East and West: The Reach of Reason.” New York Review of Books.
      July 20, 2000, 34. Excerpted from Glover, Humanity.
Shaw, Daniel. “Hume’s Moral Sentimentalism.” Hume Studies 19, 1: 31–51.
Sinicropi, Giovanni. “The Saga of the Corleones: Puzo, Coppola, and The Godfa-
      ther (an interpretive essay).” italian americana 2, 1: 79–90.
                                    Works Cited                                  325



Smith, Barbara Herrnstein. Contingencies of Value: Alternative Perspectives for Criti-
     cal Theory. Cambridge: Harvard, 1988.
Smith, Carl. Chicago and the American Literary Imagination 1880–1920. Chicago: U
     of Chicago P, 1984.
Smith, Dennis Mack. A History of Sicily: Modern Sicily after 1713. London: Chatto
     & Windus, 1968.
Sollors, Werner. Beyond Ethnicity: Consent and Descent in American Culture. New
      York: Oxford UP, 1986.
———, ed. The Invention of Ethnicity. New York: Oxford UP, 1989.
The Sopranos. 1999–2001.
Stowe, Harriet Beecher. Uncle Tom’s Cabin. [1852]. New York: Penguin, 1981.
Talese, Gay. Honor Thy Father. New York: Fawcett Crest, 1971.
Tamburri, Anthony J. A Semiotic of Ethnicity: In (Re)cognition of the Italian/American
    Writer. Albany: State U of New York P, 1998.
Tarentino, Quentin. Pulp Fiction. 1994.
Tompkins, Jane. West of Everything: The Inner Life of Westerns. New York: Oxford
    UP, 1992.
Torgovnick, Marianna DeMarco. Crossing Ocean Parkway: Readings by an American
     Daughter. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1994.
Trey, George. Solidarity and Difference: The Politics of Enlightenment in the Aftermath
      of Modernity. Albany: State U of New York P, 1998.
Updike, John. Rabbit, Run. New York: Knopf, 1960.
Viscusi, Robert. Astoria. Toronto: Guernica Editions, 1995.
———. “Divine Comedy Blues.” Beyond the Margin. Ed. Giordano, Tamburri. 69–
   82.
Vittiello, Justin. “Off the Boat and up the Creek without a Paddle.” Beyond the
       Margin. 23–45.
Waugh, Patricia. “Stalemates? Feminists, Postmodernists and Unfinished Issues
    in Modern Aesthetics.” The Politics of Pleasure: Aesthetics and Cultural Theory.
    Ed. Stephen Regan. Philadelphia: Open U P. 180–201.
White, Mimi. “Ideological Analysis and Television.” Channels of Discourse. Ed.
     Allen. 134–71.
Whyte, William H. The Organization Man. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1956.
Wilson, Sloan. The Man in the Grey Flannel Suit. New York: Simon & Schuster,
     1955.
Wister, Owen. The Virginian. [1902]. New York: Viking Penguin, 1988.
Zaleski, Jeff. “Mario Puzo: The Don of Bestsellers Returns.” Contemporary Literary
      Criticism 107: 212–14.
This page intentionally left blank.
                                 Index


Abbandando, Genco (The Godfather),       Bakhtin, M.M., 16, 87–89, 92, 94–95,
  1, 88, 90–96, 99, 100–03, 114, 161,      98, 106, 109, 135, 218, 224, 233–
  205; and bella figura, 125–27; and       34, 301n. 1, 302n. 3, 302n. 4, 306n.
  omerta, 125–27                           5; and answering words, 102; and
Adorno, Theodor, 18, 34, 237, 262,         authoritative discourse, 88–89, 94,
  271, 300n. 7                             125; and dialogics, 16, 88–90, 94–
Aesthetics: and the aesthetically          95, 98, 103, 106, 129; and epic,
  “bad,” 27; and the aesthetically         233–34; and internally persuasive
  “good,” 27; and distaste, 27; and        discourse, 88–89, 93, 125; and
  moral agnosticism, 29; and moral         single-voiced myth, 159; The Dia-
  judgment, 27; and Romanticism,           logic Imagination, 88–89, 92, 94, 95,
  28; and taste culture, 31                98, 106, 169, 218, 233–34; Problems
Agee, James, 314n. 29; Let Us Now          of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, 84, 98
  Praise Famous Men, 314n. 29            Baldwin, James, 71
Albrecht, Chris, 288                     Balzac, Honore de, 3, 185
Alger, Horatio, 178                      Banta, Martha, 309n. 6; Failure and
All About Eve, 74                          Success in America, 309n. 6
All in the Family, 283                   Barnes, Elizabeth, 173, 201; States of
Ally McBeal, 286                           Sympathy, 173, 199, 201
Althusser, Louis, 34                     Barthes, Roland, 16, 25, 48–49, 106,
American Beauty, 263                       149–62, 166, 168–70, 186, 271–72,
American fiction criticism, 31; and        285, 302n. 13; and Bakhtinian
  capitalist heroes, 182                   dialogic, 106; and critical melo-
American Romance paradigm, 31, 186         drama, 49; and de-politicized
Analyze This, 249                          speech, 89–93; and distaste, 307n.
Arnow, Harriette, 131; The                 13; and Foucault, 306n. 7; and
  Dollmaker, 131                           historicizing, 152–54, 170; and
Auden, W.H., 203                           ideologizing, 25; and naturaliz-
Austen, Jane, 302n. 10; Pride and          ing, 152–54; and poetizing, 25;
  Prejudice, 302n. 10                      and politicized speech, 89–93; and
                                           signifiers, 156–57, 306n. 6; and
                                           universal signifieds, 186; Mytholo-
Bachelard, Gaston, 110                     gies, 16, 25, 48–49, 89–90, 93, 106,
Baier, Annette: A Progress of Senti-       149, 151–52, 154–58, 160–61, 166,
  ments, 20                                168–70, 186, 271–72, 302n. 13,

                                       327
 328                  The Godfather and American Culture



Barthes, Roland (continued)               Bourdieu, Pierre, 2, 25, 29, 31–32,
  306n. 7; S/Z, 152, 161; Writing           36, 119, 138, 169, 180, 240, 250,
  Degree Zero, 152                          270, 272, 299n. 1; and aesthetic
Barzini, Luigi, 111, 184, 198, 313–         sense, 25; and artistic capital, 58;
  14n. 22; The Italians, 111, 184, 198,     and economic capital, 58; and
  314n. 22                                  habitus, 58–59, 141; and Kant, 25;
Baym, Nina, 175; “Melodramas of             and pleasure, 30; and Puzo, 82;
  Beset Manhood,” 175                       and sentiment, 28; and social
Beatty, Warren, 249                         agents, 58; and taste, 47–48; and
Beckett, Samuel, 123; The                   taste in Kant, 2, 25, 32; Distinc-
  Unnamable, 123                            tion, 2, 28–29, 48, 82, 271; The
Bell, Daniel, 243                           Field of Cultural Production, 51,
Bella figura, 108–109, 113–20, 128–29,      58–59, 82, 95, 169
  134, 136, 161, 184, 188, and elite      Boyle, T. Coraghessan, 315n. 33;
  readings, 113, 126                        Riven Rock, 315n. 33
Bellow, Saul, 11, 71; Dangling Man,       Brando, Marlon, 143, 249
  11                                      Brasi, Luca (The Godfather), 31, 118,
Benigni, Roberto, 47                        167, 184, 242; in The Sopranos, 257
Bentley, Eric, 185                        Brooks, Albert, 312n. 6
Bernhard, Sandra, 258, 261                Brooks, Peter, 184–85; The Melodra-
Best sellers: and melodrama, 184;           matic Imagination, 184–85
  and reading pleasure, 150               Brothers, Joyce, 270
Best Years of Our Lives, The, 7           Brown, Gillian, 194, 198; Domestic
Big Sleep, The, 254                         Individualism, 194, 198
Bloch, Ernst, 235–36                      Brutta figura, 126, 130
Boelhower, William, 108, 120, 141,        Buffy the Vampire Slayer, 273
  144, 305n. 17, 305n. 24; and eth-       Burke, Kenneth, 34
  nic semiosis, 108–10; and habitare,     Burr, Aaron, 192
  110, 141, 305n. 18; “Adjusting
  Sites,” 141, 144; Through a Glass
  Darkly, 109–11, 117–18, 120, 128,       Caan, James, 146
  142                                     Cagney, James, 248, 311n. 10
Bogart, Humphrey, 248                     Cahan, Abraham, 222; The Rise of
Bonanno, Bill, 313n. 12                     David Levinsky, 222
Bonasera, Amerigo (The Godfather),        Call It Sleep, 128
  114–16, 203–04, 291                     Camus, Albert, 266; The Stranger,
Bonnie and Clyde, 254                       266
Booth, Wayne, 34, 36, 43, 102, 300n.      Cannell, Stephen, 249; Wise Guy, 249
  6, 303n. 16, 307n. 12; The Com-         Capone, Al, 248
  pany We Keep, 43, 102, 300n. 6          Carousel, 118
  307n. 12; A Rhetoric of Irony, 303n.    Carroll, Noel, 26–27; A Philosophy of
  16                                        Mass Art, 26–27
                                    Index                               329



Cassidy, Shaun, 315n. 34                 Cooper, James Fenimore, 175, 196,
Cavalleria Rusticana, 289                 200, 219
Cawelti, John, 174, 282, 308n. 1,        Coppola, Francis Ford, 7, 22, 52–53,
  313n. 18; Adventure, Mystery, and       56, 60–61, 63, 146–47, 163, 202,
  Romance, 174, 282, 308n. 1              231, 243–45, 248, 255–56, 283, 288,
Caygill, Howard, 48; The Art of           290, 292, 295, 301–02n. 2, 302n. 5,
  Judgement, 48                           308n. 15, 309n. 10; and adapting
Chandler, Raymond, 254                    The Godfather, 7–8, 116, 238–39
Chase, David, 258, 260–61, 268,          Corleone, Apollonia (The Godfather),
  273–79, 283–84, 289–90, 292, 313n.      164–68, 184, 199; and Luca Brasi,
  21, 314n. 27, 314n. 28, 314n. 29;       167; and Connie Corleone, 166;
  and cinema, 287–88; and The             and Khartoum, 166–68; and Lucy
  Public Enemy, 311n. 10 and Mario        Mancini, 166–67
  Puzo, 262, 288, 290, 311n. 8; and      Corleone, Connie (The Godfather), 1,
  television, 253, 262, 286–88; and       61, 114, 118, 136, 147, 167, 202,
  writing The Sopranos, 315n. 36,         223; in Godfather III, 202; and
  315n. 37                                Michael as murderer, 205
Chase, Richard, 186; The American        Corleone, Fredo (The Godfather), 10,
  Novel and its Tradition, 185–86         30, 146–47, 238, 316n. 3
Cheaper by the Dozen, 183                Corleone, Kay Adams, (The Godfa-
Cheever, John, 182                        ther), 53, 66, 88, 103, 113–14, 118–
“Choosing a Dream: Italians in            19, 124–25, 136–37, 143, 152, 159,
  Hell’s Kitchen” (Puzo), 53–54,          165, 168, 170, 174, 198, 201–02,
  56, 59, 81, 109, 143–44, 148, 178–      205–06, 216, 223–24, 240, 306n. 2;
  79                                      and authoritative discourse, 101–
Churchill, Winston, 194, 238              102, 206; and bella figura, 116; and
Cladel, Leon, 59                          catholicism, 100; and moral inter-
Clancy, Tom, 52, 243                      rogation, 99–102, 153; as outsider,
Clarke, Mae, 248                          307n. 10; and WASP family, 235;
Cohn, Harry, 76                           and women’s spaces, 217, 313n.
Cohen, Mickey, 249                        13
Cold War, 6, 188, 295                    Corleone, Mama (The Godfather), 10,
Collins, Jackie, 249; Lucky/Chances,      101–03, 132, 165, 201, 279; and
  249                                     politicized speech, 100
Condon, Richard, 249; Prizzi’s           Corleone, Michael (The Godfather),
  Honor, 249, 311n. 12                    2, 22–23, 34, 44–45, 55, 57, 66–67,
Conrad, Joseph, 56, 150, 308n. 16;        75, 100, 103, 107, 114, 116, 131–32,
  Heart of Darkness, 308n. 16; Vic-       134, 137, 151, 174, 177, 199, 216–
  tory, 150                               17, 220–1, 224–25, 231, 248, 269,
Conroy, Pat, 270; The Prince of Tides,    279, 283, 289–90, 296; as action
  270                                     hero, 118–21, 187–88; and
Cooper, Gary, 264, 299n. 2, 306n. 2       American destiny, 13, 179; and
 330                The Godfather and American Culture



Corleone, Michael (The Godfather)        87, 89, 132, 146–47, 151, 157, 206–
 (continued)                             07, 211–16, 221, 223, 225, 231, 264,
  American individualism, 125; and       296, 307n. 8; and Alan Greenspan,
 George Bailey (It’s A Wonderful         13–14; assassination attempt on,
 Life), 14; and bella figura, 118–21,    66; and authoritative discourse,
 188; as college boy, 187, 197; and      89–90, 96, 98; and bella figura, 114–
 the country club, 37; and destiny,      15, 125–27; and Bonasera, 114–16;
 99, 106, 144, 188, 197–200; and         and compassion, 205; and de-
 disgust, 30; and divided nature,        politicized speech, 90, 100; and
 152–53, 205; and escape, 141, 144,      destiny, 97, 105, 195–97; and the
 146–48; and ethnic hybridity, 124–      Dons’ convention, 189–95; and
 25; and ethnic identity, 60, 293–       ethics, 185; and family business,
 94; and exceptionalism, 198; and        95–97, 102, 206; and going bad,
 family, 99, 148; and family busi-       32, 69, 175; and immigration, 112;
 ness, 100, 102, 187–88, 226, 240;       and Johnny Fontane, 60–64, 82; at
 and father, 201; and going bad,         Genco’s deathbed, 90–95; and
 31–32, 176; and history, 238–43;        killing Fanucci, 10; and Alexander
 as infant in Godfather II, 10; as       Hamilton, 191–93; and maternal
 insider, 36; and isolation, 146–48;     voice, 203–04; and melodrama,
 and the Kennedys, 118, 238; and         206; and murder, 175, 204; as
 killing Fredo, 30, 146–47, 316n. 3;     murderer, 204–06; and naming,
 and killing McCluskey, 36; and          309n. 1; and naturalizing, 161; and
 making self, 41; as murderer, 197,      Nino Valenti, 60–64; and omerta,
 205–06; and omerta, 124–25; as          125–27; and “Our World,” 194,
 outsider, 36; and parody of dia-        316n. 2; and power, 10, 158, 161;
 logue, 101; and “Pearl Harbor           Puzo’s mother as, 131–32; and
 Sunday,” 146–47; and power,             revenge, 31; and signification, 152;
 240–41; and refusal, 32; and re-        and silence, 121–22; as statesman,
 verse immigration, 240; in The          189–93; and taste, 31; and Thomas
 Sicilian, 244–45; and Sicily, 121,      Sutpen (Absalom, Absalom!), 105;
 166–67, 240; as soldier-son, 7,         and unitary language, 169–70; and
 146–48; and World War II hero-          usurpation of women’s roles, 203–
 ism, 31, 36, 103, 118, 121, 197, 239    04
Corleone, Sonny (The Godfather), 10,    Corleones: and the Cold War, 241–
 22, 31, 64, 74, 88, 98–100, 103,        42; and destiny, 106; and immi-
 114, 120, 146–47, 162, 184, 199,        gration, 196; and injustice, 2; and
 238–39, 248, 271; as corpse, 204–       male silence, 124; and New
 05; and family business, 95–97,         World identity, 4; and Old World
 102; and politicized speech, 95–        imaginary, 40; and Old World
 97; and physical coding, 153; and       mobility, 4; as “Our Gang,” 15,
 sexual equipment, 163                   40; and the Sopranos, 314n. 27;
Corleone, Vito (The Godfather), 1–2,     and victims, 1
 7, 22, 40–41, 44–45, 47, 57, 67, 75,   Cosa Nostra, 33, 191, 193, 218, 233
                                   Index                                331



Cover Me, 315n. 34                      Doane, Mary Ann, 314n. 25
Cozzens, James Gould, 182               Doctorow, E. L., 6, 16, 177–78, 230;
Crying Game, The, 259                     and atavism, 226–27; and Dreiser,
Crystal, Billy, 249                       177–78, 225; and family, 218–21;
                                          and The Godfather, 209–27, 309n.
                                          2, 310n. 3; and going bad, 226;
Dallas, 286                               and Jack London, 225–27; “The
Darby, William, 310n. 4                   Beliefs of Writers,” 224–25; Billy
Dark Arena, The (Puzo), 52, 54–55,        Bathgate, 222, 309–10n. 2; “Jack
  64–65, 71, 81, 123, 179, 239, 303n.     London and his Call of the Wild,”
  15, 305–06n. 26                         226–27; Ragtime, 6, 16, 177, 209–
Davidson, Cathy N., 141, 305n. 17         27, 309–10n. 2, 310n. 3
DeLillo, Don, 123, 313n. 19; and        Donnie Brasco, 249, 311n. 14
  silence, 123; End Zone, 123; Un-      Dorsey, Tommy, 259
  derworld, 123, 313n. 19               Dostoevsky, Fyodor, 55, 185; The
DeNiro, Robert, 248–49                    Brothers Karamazov, 68; Crime and
DePalma, Brian, 249; Carlito’s Way,      Punishment, 69
  249; Scarface, 249; The Untouch-      Douglas, Lloyd C., 198; Magnificent
  ables, 249                             Obsession, 198; The Robe, 198
Depp, Johnny, 311n. 14                  Dow, Tony, 315n. 34
Derrida, Jacques: on Kant’s Critique,   Dragnet, 254
  32                                    Dreiser, Theodore, 176–82, 198, 200,
Destiny, 3, 8, 27, 97–98, 106, 121,      225, 308n. 1; The Financier, 177,
  123, 175, 218–20, 225–26, 254; and     179–80; Jennie Gerhardt, 179; Sister
  authorial control, 99, 106; and        Carrie, 177, 179, 225; The Titan, 177
  best sellers, 198; as deep
  historicization, 99; and demo-
  cratic exceptionalism, 196; and       ER, 286
  design, 102–106; and epic, 235;       Eagleton, Terry, 306n. 1; Criticism
  and immigrants, 196; inaugurated        and Ideology, 306n. 1
  by murder, 197; and liberal plu-      Eastwood, Clint, 247
  ralism, 39; as made, 196; and         Eliot, T.S., 113
  Manifest Destiny, 39, 196, 198–       Elite fiction, 5; and analysis, 265,
  200, 206; and melodrama, 195–           271–72; and bella figura, 113; and
  200; and the Old World, 55; and         criticism, 150, 308n. 17; and des-
  prehistory, 196; in rigid plot, 99      tiny, 104–05; and dialogue with
Devil’s Advocate, The, 249                popular texts, 35; heroic figures
Dickens, Charles, 185, 284; Bleak         in, 44; and popular fiction, 33,
  House, 185, 285                         222–27; and postwar American
DiDonato, Pietro, 303n. 5, 304n. 12       novel, 240; in Ragtime, 209–11,
DiMaggio, Joe, 56                         214, 219; and silence 122–23
Dixon, Thomas, 230, 237; The Clans-     Ellison, Ralph, 304n. 14; Invisible
  man, 230                                Man, 304n. 14
 332                 The Godfather and American Culture



Epic: and amorality, 242; and Cosa         What Was Literature, 6, 8–9, 229,
  Nostra, 233; and fairy tale, 235–        235, 262–63, 310n. 5
  36; and immigration, 230–31; and       Fish, Stanley, 35
  inadvertent epic, 229–32, 242, 271;    Fisher, Philip, 11–12, 173, 175, 200,
  and melodrama, 237; and the              219, 299n. 4, 315–16n. 1; and
  novel, 232–35; and the                   extension of humanity, 11; and
  postmodern, 233–34                       Manifest Destiny, 196, 199–200;
Erdrich, Louise, 131; Love Medicine,       and popular forms, 199; and
  131                                      Romance of Consciousness, 150,
Ethnic semiosis, 108–10, 149; and          202, 269; and the Sentimental
  bella figura, 127; and misreading,       Novel, 202; and sentimental re-
  140; and “Pearl Harbor Sunday”           sponse, 205; “American Literary
  (Godfather II), 146–48; and silence,     and Cultural Studies Since the
  122–25                                   Civil War,” 13; Hard Facts, 11,
                                           150, 173, 175, 199–200, 202, 205,
                                           219
Falco, Edie, 274                         Fiske, John, 176–77
Falcon Crest, 286                        Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 71, 78, 182,
Falcone, 315n. 34                          312n. 11; Tender is the Night, 312n.
Family, 6; and art, 33; as collective      11
  American sign, 199; and family         Flaubert, Gustave, 95, 169; Senti-
  business, 87, 95–99, 102, 199–200;       mental Education, 169
  in Jameson, 44–47; and killer          Follett, Ken, 243
  families, 11; and making of au-        Fontane, Johnny (The Godfather), 56,
  thority, 87; and murder, 174–75,         60–64, 79–83, 107, 116, 118, 154,
  199–200; and vampire families, 11        162, 184, 205; as artist, 62–63; and
Fante, John, 303n. 5, 304n. 12             bella figura, 140; in comeback, 80;
Faulkner, William, 4, 71, 78, 182;         and daughters, 164–66; in Holly-
  Absalom, Absalom!, 4, 105; Light in      wood, 163–65; and innocence,
  August, 128                              164–66; as Italian singer, 81; and
Favreau, Jon, 258–61, 296, 312n. 6         manhood, 82; as Puzo’s double,
Ferraro, Thomas, 143, 174, 307n. 11,       61, 63; and sexual desire, 79; as
  308n. 15, 311n. 12; “Blood in the        sex symbol, 6; as Frank Sinatra,
  Marketplace,” 143, 174, 311n. 12;        60, 77–79; and singing, 79–81;
  “ ‘My Way’ in ‘Our America,’ ”           and Some Came Running, 76–79;
  307n. 11, 308n. 15                       in The Sopranos, 259; and women,
Fiedler, Leslie, 6, 16, 229–30, 234–       164–66
  35, 237, 262, 310n. 5; and defin-      Fools Die (Puzo), 52, 53, 55, 59, 64–
  ing popular narrative, 8; and the        79, 82–83, 164, 238, 244, 246, 292,
  “inadvertent epic,” 16, 262; The         300n. 1; and art as theft, 74–76;
  Inadvertent Epic, 230; Love and          and author’s depression, 67; and
  Death in the American Novel, 230;        criminality, 68; and Martin Eden,
                                    Index                                 333



  181; and Norman Mailer, 70–76;         Giuliano, Salvatore, 244–45
  as Puzo’s fictional summa, 53;         Glover, Jonathan, 300n. 4
  and resentment of family, 81; and      Godard, Jean Luc, 288
  Some Came Running, 79; and Nino        Godfather, The (Puzo), 1, 3, 22, 33,
  Valenti, 80                              37–38, 49, 51, 58, 62, 65, 67, 71,
Fortunate Pilgrim, The (Puzo), 33, 52,     75, 79, 81–82, 90–96, 108–09, 291,
  54–55, 65, 71, 80, 107, 126–48,          299n. 3; American Dream in, 41;
  168, 179, 213, 290, 292; and aes-        and American founding docu-
  thetics, 139; and American as-           ments, 189–95; and American
  similation, 142–46; and bella            Literary Naturalism, 176–82; and
  figura, 134; and class-bound             audience reception, 292–93; and
  ethnicity, 138–39; and dialogics,        authority of the signifier, 154–59;
  129–30; and elite fiction, 29; and       bad murderers in, 151; and bella
  ethnic fiction, 127–38; and ethnic       figura, 113–20; and business, 183,
  semiosis, 108; and gendered              187–93; and capitalist heroes, 183;
  ethnicity, 137–38; and The Godfa-        as Cold War text, 6, 7; as com-
  ther, 129–39; and Italian American       modity, 231; as conservative cri-
  critique, 137–40 and Italian             tique, 242; and copies, 247–51;
  American roles, 131–41; and Ma-          and critical judgment, 43; and
  fia tales, 56; and Pearl Harbor,         design, 102–06; and destiny, 97,
  146, 239; and Puzo’s mother,             99, 102–06, 195–200; and
  203; and The Sopranos, 278–79;           dialogics, 87–89, 94–95, 98–99,
  women’s roles in, 128–38                 106; and elite fiction, 16, 209–11,
Foucault, Michel, 88                       222–27, 301n. 2; and epic, 229–38;
Fourth K, The (Puzo), 304n. 13             and ethics, 29, 236; and the eth-
Frangello, Gina, 299n. 1, 312n. 8          nic encyclopedia, 108–09; and
Freshman, The, 249                         ethnic hybridity, 121; ethnic iden-
                                           tity in, 47, 214; as ethnic novel, 6,
                                           7; and ethnic semiosis, 108–09;
Gallo, Joe, 259                            and ethnic type scenes, 114–16,
Gambino, Richard, 14                       146–48; and fairy tale, 235–36;
Gandolfini, James, 250                     and family, 27, 46, 183, 187–93,
The Gang That Couldn’t Shoot               219–21, 226–27, 232; famous
  Straight, 259                            phrases in, 4; false consciousness
Gardaphe, Fred, 14, 113, 142, 144,         in, 46–47; and fathers, 213–16,
  301–02n. 2, 303n. 2, 305n. 19; and       220; and film, 16; and force phi-
  reverse assimilation, 303n. 7            losophy, 176–84; and The Fortu-
Garofalo, Janeane, 258, 261                nate Pilgrim, 129–39; and
Gaut, Beryl, 27; ‘The Ethical Criti-       freedom, 41, 193; and godfathers,
  cism of Art,” 27                         9, 15; and “Godfather America,”
Gilbert, Sandra, 141, 304–05n. 17          6; and going bad, 140, 236; good
Ginzburg, Carlo, 305n. 24                  murderers in, 151; as historical
 334                The Godfather and American Culture



Godfather, The (Puzo) (continued)         tions, 296; and resisting criticism,
  novel, 175, 201, 206; and history,      26; the “right” reading of, 36;
  211–12, 220, 225, 238–43; and           sentimental logic in, 200–07; and
  Hollywood decadence, 162–64;            the sentimental novel, 175, 201,
  and identity, 293–95, 297 and           206; silences in, 11, 121–27; siting
  immigrant saga, 183–84, 187, 199–       of, 6; and The Sopranos, 253–57,
  200; and immigration, 7, 212, 214,      260–63, 265, 267, 269–71, 276–278,
  230–32; and inadvertent epic,           281–83; and taste, 47; and Viet-
  229–30, 237, 242–43; incestuous         nam, 241–42; and “what if every-
  themes in, 235; and Italian             one . . .” 153–56; and women’s
  American critics, 141–42; and           roles, 40, 99–102, 132, 200–07,
  Italian American family, 15; and        295, 309n. 8; and women’s signi-
  Italian American reactions, 9; and      fication, 162–68
  James Jones, 76–79; and justifying    Godfather I (film), 4, 6, 8, 22, 56, 60–
  murder, 42; and lack of pattern,        61, 116, 133, 140, 151, 154, 254–56,
  167–68; life world of, 42; and          259, 289, 302n. 5, 303n. 4, 303n. 6,
  literary capital, 5; male coloniza-     303n. 14; and killing of
  tion of grief in, 205; and melo-        McCluskey and Solozzo, 197; and
  drama, 4, 7–8, 173–79, 182,             pasta sauce, 309n. 10; in The So-
  184–90, 194–95, 199–200, 203,           pranos, 257; Nino Valenti’s era-
  205–07; and the melting pot, 36,        sure in, 63, 80
  200; and miscegenated themes,         Godfather II (film), 4, 6, 8, 9, 22, 141,
  235; and mobility, 41; and moral        151, 206, 212, 231, 243, 247, 255,
  criticism, 22–23, 297; and moral        283, 289, 296, 301n. 2, 303n. 14,
  understanding, 26, 29; and mur-         307n. 14; and bella figura, 116; and
  der, 46, 197, 215; and Mythologies,     Cuba, 238–39; and historicizing,
  151–61, 166–70; naturalizing the        238–239; and killing Fanucci, 10;
  signifier in, 159–62; and the           and killing Fredo, 30, 146–47,
  1960s, 7; Nino and Johnny’s sing-       316n. 3; “Pearl Harbor Sunday”
  ing in, 61–63, 79–83; and non-          in, 146–48; in The Sopranos, 256
  assimilation, 36; and ordinariness,   Godfather III (film), 4, 6, 8, 22, 34,
  207; and “Our Gang,” 210, 218–          53, 116, 141, 151, 202, 231, 289
  22; patterns of death in, 23; as      “Godfather Papers, The” (Puzo), 33
  popular classic, 7; and popular       Godfather Papers and Other Confes-
  fiction, 16, 35, 113, 209–13, 218,      sions, The (Puzo), 53, 60, 64, 71,
  222–27; and popular fiction criti-      73, 76, 81–82, 109
  cism, 30, 168–70; and popular         Godfather narrative: definition of,
  narrative, 6, 243; as popular           8; and Italian American reactions,
  novel, 6; and Puzo’s career, 52–        9
  64; Puzo’s estimate of, 57; and       Golden, Arthur, 314n. 33; Memoirs
  Ragtime, 209–27; and real victims,      of a Geisha, 314n. 33
  159–60, 170; and residual forma-      Gotti, John, 255
                                    Index                                335



Gramsci, Antonio, 34                    Hill Street Blues, 254
Gravano, Sammy, 255, 311n. 1            Hirsch, E.D., 36
Gray, John, 38; Enlightenment’s         Hitler, Adolf, 190, 238–39, 271
  Wake, 38                              Hobbes, Thomas, 194
“Great Consciousness Shift”: in         Homer, Winslow, 219
  popular fiction, 202                  Honor Thy Father, 249
Green, Rose Basile, 305–06n. 26         Hoover, J. Edgar, 158, 189
Greenspan, Alan, 12–14; and Ayn         Horkheimer, Max, 34, 300n. 7
  Rand, 13                              Huckleberry Finn, 128
Griffith, D. W., 230; The Birth of a    Hume, David, 19, 24, 161; and aes-
  Nation, 230                             thetics, 26; and approbation, 27;
Guillory, John, 38, 300n. 5; Cultural     and destiny, 27; and disapproba-
  Capital, 38, 48, 300n. 5                tion, 42; and Jameson, 45; and
Gunsmoke, 254                             Kant, 23; and moral criticism, 42;
                                          and morality, 23; and primacy of
                                          experience, 20; and proper senti-
Habermas, Jurgen, 37; and the             ment, 22; and reason, 21, 23; and
  bourgeois public sphere, 37–38          Rorty, 40; and sentiment, 20–21,
Habitare, 6, 110, 141                     23, 26, 48; and taste, 26, 28, 42,
Habitus, 6, 52, 58–60, 63, 141            48, 300n. 8; An Enquiry Concern-
Hagen, Tom (The Godfather), 104,          ing the Principles of Morals, 20, 23;
  107, 113, 119–20, 138, 147, 154,        “Of the Standard of Taste,” 19,
  162, 168, 188, 224, 304n. 9; and        26, 28, 42, 48, 300n. 8; A Treatise
  bella figura, 116–17                    of Human Nature, 42
Haley, Alex, 230, 237; Roots, 230       Huston, John, 249; Prizzi’s Honor, 249
Hamilton, Alexander, 191–93             Hutcheon, Linda, 141, 221, 305n.
Hammett, Dashiell, 254                    17, 307n. 12; Irony’s Edge, 307n.
Harlow, Jean, 248                         12
Hawks, Howard, 248; Scarface, 248
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 31, 104, 186;
  and Tony Soprano, 10; The Scarlet     Imperioli, Michael, 255, 312n. 5,
  Letter, 185                              312n. 6
Hemingway, Ernest, 3, 11, 52, 71,       Inside Las Vegas (Puzo), 67, 244
  73, 78, 123, 224, 239, 299n. 2; A     Invisible Man, 128
  Farewell to Arms, 71, 122, 239; In    Irigary, Luce, 304n. 14; This Sex
  Our Time, 52; “Soldier’s Home,”          Which Is Not One, 304n. 14
  239; The Sun Also Rises, 122          Italian American literary critics,
Hendin, Josephine Gattuso, 141             141–42
High Noon, 254                          Italian American narrative, 9, 12
Hill, George Roy, 248–49; The Sting,    Italian Americans: and American
  249                                      civic family, 15; and multiple
Hill, Henry, 248, 311n. 9                  roles, 131–41
 336                  The Godfather and American Culture



Italianita, 55, 108–09, 136; and Ital-      judgment, 299n 2; and negative
   ian American literary critics, 141–      magnitudes, 31; and popular
   42                                       fiction, 24; and sensationless
It’s a Wonderful Life, 7, 13                pleasure, 30; and sentiment, 23;
                                            and sentimentality, 24; and taste,
                                            2, 26, 29, 38, 41, 48; Critique of
Jackson, Samuel L., 250                     Aesthetic Judgment, 19, 23, 25, 29,
James, Henry, 56, 113, 186; “Daisy          31, 300n. 5; “On Intellectual Inter-
  Miller,” 103; The Portrait of a Lady,     est in the Beautiful,” 25
  103                                     Kazan, Elia, 248: On The Waterfront,
James, William, 177                         248
Jameson, Fredric, 44, 48, 169, 235–       Kekes, John, 38, 306n. 3; The Moral-
  36; and best sellers, 47; and des-        ity of Pluralism, 38
  tiny, 235–36; and ethical criticism,    Kennedy, John. F., 238
  46, 300n. 7; and family in The          Kennedy, Joseph P., 308n. 5
  Godfather, 44–47; and history, 45;      Khartoum (The Godfather), 1, 154–
  and Hume, 45; and ideological             55, 158–59, 162–64; 167–68, 188,
  critique, 44–47; and Marxist criti-       199, 307n. 14
  cism, 46; and mass culture, 46;         King, Stephen, 52
  and popular narrative, 45; and
  simultaneity, 46; and Utopian
  critique, 44–47; Marxism and            Lansky, Meyer, 249
  Form, 235–36; The Political Uncon-      Last Don, The (Puzo), 11, 131, 142,
  scious, 45–47, 235                        164, 231, 238, 244–47, 250, 255,
  “Postmodernism . . .” 235;                301n. 6
  “Reification and Utopia in Mass         Law and Order, 286
  Culture,” 44                            Lentricchia, Frank, 141, 229, 305n.
Jefferson, Thomas, 201                      24, 305n. 25, 311n. 13, 313n. 20;
Jones, James, 76–79, 301n. 6; and           “The Edge of Night,” 311n. 13;
  parallels with Puzo, 76–79; From          Johnny Critelli, 229, 305n. 24,
  Here to Eternity, 76–79; Some Came        305n. 25, 313n. 20
  Running, 76–79, 301n. 7                 Leone, Sergio, 247–48; Once Upon a
Joyce, James, 123, 232; A Portrait of       Time in America, 247–48
  the Artist as a Young Man, 123;         LeRoy, Mervyn, 248; Little Caesar,
  Ulysses, 232                              248
                                          Levinson, Barry, 249; Bugsy, 249
                                          Lewis, Marina, 313n. 15
Kant, Immanuel: and aesthetic             Life With Father, 183
 judgment, 28; and aesthetic              Liotta, Ray, 248
 value, 26; and agreeable senti-          Locke, John, 194, 201; Essay Con-
 ment, 23; and disinterested judg-          cerning Human Understanding, 201
 ments, 2, 20, 22, 25; and Hume,          London, Jack, 176–77, 180–82, 198;
 23; and intellectual power of              The Call of the Wild, 177, 198, 226–
                                   Index                                337



  27; Martin Eden, 177, 180–82; The     Manifest Destiny, 39, 195–96, 206,
  Sea Wolf, 177                          232
Long, Elizabeth, 198, 240; The          Mankiewicz, Joseph, 152
  American Dream and the Popular        Marchand, Nancy, 314n. 23
  Novel, 240                            Married to the Mob, 249
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 196        Martin, Dean, 77–79, 259, 311n. 7;
Lopez, Daniel, 311n. 11                  and Omerta (Puzo), 311n. 7; in
Ludlum, Robert, 243                      Some Came Running, 77–79
Lukacs, Georg, 229, 232–33, 262,        Martin, Ronald, 176, 185; American
  271; The Theory of the Novel, 229,     Literature and the Universe of Force,
  232–33                                 176–77, 185
                                        McWilliams, John, 310n. 1
                                        Melfi, Jennifer (The Sopranos), 253,
MacLaine, Shirley, 77                    263–74, 276–78, 280–81, 286, 289–
Mafia, 9, 53, 57, 59, 117, 120, 247,     90, 293; and moral crisis, 270–73;
 291; and American business, 44;         and moral inquiry, 263–73; and
 and crime as business; 44; and          Livia Soprano, 280
 cultural-historical grounding, 12;     Melodrama, 4, 6–7, 16, 57, 65, 97–
 and The Sicilian, 244–45; and           98, 102, 130, 137, 148, 150–51,
 Sicilian history, 112–13                159, 203, 205–06, 212, 220, 223,
Mailer, Norman, 3, 70–76; as Osano       227, 231, 237, 247, 264, 296; and
 in Fools Die, 72–76; and Puzo’s         American Dreaming, 179; and
 career, 71–76, 309n. 6; Advertise-      best sellers, 184; and business,
 ments for Myself, 71–73; An Ameri-      294; cutting across genres in, 174,
 can Dream, 71–72, 76; The Armies        184, 200; definitions of, 185–86;
 of the Night, 71; Barbary Shore, 71;    and destiny, 195–200; and epic,
 The Deer Park, 71, 73; Of a Fire        243; and exceptionalism, 194; and
 On The Moon, 71, 309n. 6; The           family, 174–76, 294; and force
 Naked and the Dead, 71; “The Tal-       philosophy, 177–80; gangsters in,
 ent in the Room,” 72–73; “The           8; in The Godfather, 173–79, 182,
 Time of Her Time,” 73; “The             184–90, 194–95, 199–200, 203,
 White Negro,” 71, 73; Why Are           205–07, 288, 290; and immigrants,
 We in Vietnam, 71–72                    174–75, 177, 187; and literary
“Making of The Godfather, The”           criticism, 186; and male melo-
 (Puzo), 4, 51, 53, 56–57, 59, 65,       drama, 240–41, 263; and Sicily,
 179                                     111; and The Sopranos, 273, 278,
Mancini, Lucy (The Godfather), 8, 64,    281–83, 287–90; and television,
 308n. 15; and Apollonia Corleone,       282–88
 165–66; and physical coding, 153,      Melville, Herman, 31, 186, 300n. 1;
 205; and sexual equipment, 163,         Moby Dick, 300n. 1; Pierre, 122,
 201; and soft core fantasy, 163         300n. 1
Mangione, Jere, 144, 303n. 5, 304n.     Merlyn, John (Fools Die), 65–79, 246;
 12                                      and art as theft, 74–75; as blank
 338                 The Godfather and American Culture



Merlyn, John (Fools Die) (continued)     Mob Princess, 249
 slate, 65; as “crook,” 68–70; and       Modernism: and canceling of senti-
 gambling, 67–69; and “going              ment, 21; and ethnic heroes, 142;
 under,” 67; and isolation from           and silence, 122–25
 family, 67–68; as orphan, 65; and       Moltisanti, Christopher (The Sopra-
 Puzo, 65–70, 73–76; and self-pity,       nos), 255–63, 266–68, 281–82, 287,
 66; as writer; 65, 68–70, 73–75          290, 296, 312n. 4; and cinema,
Metacriticism, 5, 216, 224; and criti-    256–62, 312n. 5, 312n 6, 312n. 7,
 cal paradigms, 6                         312n. 8; and religion, 274–76
Miami Vice, 254                          Moretti, Willie, 259
Michaels, Walter Benn, 305n. 23,         Morison, Samuel Eliot, 191
 313n. 14; Our America, 305n. 23,        Morrison, Toni, 131, 133; Beloved, 131
 313n. 14                                Muni, Paul, 248
Michener, James, 310n. 4; Hawaii,        My Antonia, 128
 310n. 4
Miller’s Crossing, 249
                                         Nabokov, Vladimir, 312n. 11; Lolita,
Minnelli, Vincente, 77
                                           312n. 11
Misery, 74
                                         Neale, Stephen, 308n. 4
Mitchell, Margaret, 198, 203, 293,
                                         New Criticism, 2, 34, 113; and sen-
 306n. 4; Gone with the Wind 4, 41,
                                           timent, 21
 56, 198, 230, 241–42, 293, 301n. 4,
                                         New World, 6, 12, 212
 306n. 4
                                         Nietzsche, Friedrich, 266
Mob narrative, 11, 13, 32, 200, 291–
                                         Norris, Frank, 176–77, 185, 223; The
 97; and American fictional his-
                                           Octopus, 223
 tory, 12; and American security,
                                         “Notes From an Unsuccessful
 242–44; and cinema, 248–50, 260,
                                           Writer’s Diary” (Puzo), 51, 53,
 285; and common language, 12;
                                           64–65, 81
 and copying, 254; definition of, 8;
                                         Nussbaum, Martha, 27
 and economics, 282, 289; and
                                         NYPD Blue, 254
 gangster genre, 248–50; and Ital-
 ian American narrative, 9, 12;
 and moral inquisition, 255, 273;        O’Hara, John, 182
 murder and family in, 10, 197,          Ohmann, Richard, 240, 310n. 4;
 292; and patriarchy, 295; and             “The Shaping of a Canon,” 240
 popular fiction, 294; and               Old World, 6, 12, 14, 125, 143, 200–
 postmodernism, 257–61, 273; and           01; and destiny, 55; and fatalism,
 public sphere, 294; as region, 12;        41; and the imaginary, 40
 and reified status, 261; and reli-      Omerta, 11, 121–25, 135, 260, 274,
 gion, 273–77; and self-reflexivity,       291; and bella figura, 121–27; and
 260–61; in The Sopranos, 254–55,          silence, 121–25
 257–61, 273, 288; and television,       Omerta (Puzo), 231, 238, 244, 246–
 250–51, 254, 282–88                       47, 311n. 7
                                       Index                              339



Ormann, Suze, 270                           destiny, 105, 198; and discredit-
Osano (Fools Die): as Norman                ing, 113; and elite fiction, 103,
  Mailer, 72–76                             211–14, 218, 222–27, 265; and
“Our Gang,” 1, 151, 296; and the            epic, 229–30; and exceptionalism,
  Corleones, 15, 40, 235; and killer        11; and fairy tale, 235–36; and
  families, 11; and Ragtime, 210,           family, 209, 213, 221, 262–63; and
  218–22                                    freedom, 41; and historical for-
                                            mations, 241; and humor, 94; and
                                            immigration, 209–12, 236; and
Pacino, Al, 116; and mob narrative          inflation, 234; and lack of
  films, 249                                memory, 101; and lack of pattern,
Paine, Tom, 201                             167–68; as literature of inflation,
Paris Review, 71–72, 29                     98; and managing narrative, 106,
Parkman, Francis, 196                       149–52; and melodrama, 98, 237;
Pearl Harbor, 54, 71, 145; and The          and mob narrative, 294; as
  Fortunate Pilgrim, 146, 239; and          monologic, 106, 122–24; and
  Godfather II, 146–148; and “Pearl         moral criticism, 22; and morality,
  Harbor Sunday,” 145–47                    95, 149–51, 160–62; and mythical
Percy, Walker, 182; The Moviegoer,          signifier, 170; and naturalizing
  182                                       the signifier, 159–62, 170; and
Perkins, Maxwell, 78                        premature clarification, 170; and
Persoff, Nehemiah, 249                      physical coding, 152–53; power
Pesci, Joe, 312n. 5                         of, 106; and Puzo, 15, 81–82; and
Pileggi, Nicholas, 311n. 9                  Ragtime, 209–11; and reader re-
Plato, 24; The Republic, 24                 sponse, 105–06; and rhetoric, 150;
Pluralism, 8, 151, 296; and identity        and self-scrutiny, 105, 139; and
  politics, 7, 153, 293–96, 316n. 6;        Sicily, 111; and signification, 150–
  and liberalism, 38–40; and moral          58, 160–62, 170; and silence, 122–
  criticism, 20; and paralysis, 41;         24; and women’s signification,
  and the public sphere, 294; and           162, 164; writing about, 5, 31–34
  reading The Godfather, 34–40, 159       Popular fiction criticism, 3, 15, 33,
Poe, Edgar Allen, 31, 186                   105–06; agendas in, 123; and
Popular literature: and escape, 3;          American Popular Culture move-
  and heroic figures, 44                    ment, 34; and containment
Popular fiction, 24, 33, 222–27; and        strategies, 170; and critical
  adulterated texts, 30; and affirma-       estrangement, 49, 106; and Cul-
  tion, 186; and authority, 94–95,          tural Studies, 34; and elite read-
  106, 170; and breadth of surfaces,        ings, 113; and ethical readings,
  21; and capitalist heroes, 182; and       49, 160, 236; and ethnic readings,
  contexts, 189; control in, 44; and        123–25; and The Godfather, 30, 49,
  criticism, 26; and defective cau-         168–70; and going bad, 32; and
  sality, 97; and design, 105; and          historicizing, 170; and ideology
 340                 The Godfather and American Culture



Popular fiction criticism (continued)    Godfather, 243–47, 250–51; as
  160, 202; and interest, 29; and        Michael Corleone, 60; as Vito
  irony, 35, 103, 202; and judg-         Corleone, 60; and criminality, 68,
  ments, 43, 48; and language, 123;      72, 291, 302n. 7; and cunning,
  and moral questions, 41, 49; and       159; and destiny, 55, 98–99, 106;
  naturalizing, 170; and pluralism,      and Theodore Dreiser, 177–82;
  37; and poetizing, 151; and            and early reading, 55; and early
  reader response, 34; and senti-        years, 53–56; and elite fiction, 5;
  ment, 48; and taste, 41, 48            and epic heroes, 234; and escape,
Popular narrative: as all-inclusive,     32, 53–54, 141, 144, 146–48; and
  45; definition of, 8; Jameson on,      ethnic fiction, 128–48; and ethnic
  45                                     hybridity, 124–25; and ethnic
Popular readership: and aesthetic        semiosis, 109–113; as failed novel-
  pleasure, 29; and consuming the        ist, 4, 58–60; and false conscious-
  product, 33; and disinterested-        ness, 3; and family, 68–70, 81, 87,
  ness, 29; and going bad, 32; and       292; and family business, 95–99,
  sentiment, 29                          187; and female sexuality, 162–68;
“Popular subversive,” 31–34              and fictional ethic, 52–60, 294;
Postmodernism, 212, 216, 271: and        and Johnny Fontane, 61–64, 79–
  pluralism, 21; and The Sopranos,       83; and gambling, 56, 65, 68, 76,
  259–62                                 81; and gendered ethnicity, 137–
Pound, Ezra, 113                         38; and Godfather success, 52; and
Practice, The, 286                       going bad, 32–33, 69, 148, 288;
Princess Daisy (Krantz), 41, 103         and going under, 67; and good
Puzo, Mario, 1, 11–13, 22–23, 42,        murderers, 2, 36; and habitus, 52,
  48–49, 51, 102, 173, 297; and the      60, 63; and historicizing, 152–54,
  American Dream, 54–55; and art,        238–41; and Hollywood, 56, 63,
  87; and art as religion, 81; and       65, 76, 141, 163–64, 291; as Italian
  art as theft, 74–76; and author’s      American author, 107–09, 111–12,
  melodrama, 176, 179, 181; and          148; and Italian American sub-
  bad murderers, 2, 36; and              jects, 52, 250; and James Jones,
  Bakhtin, 87–89, 94–95, 98, 106;        76–79; and Kennedys, 304n. 13,
  and belief in art, 4, 28, 57; and      308n. 5; and Las Vegas, 56, 63–65,
  bella figura, 113–20; and              67, 69–70, 76, 141, 291; and The
  bildungsroman, 54, 142; and            Last Don, 245–47, 250; and Jack
  Bourdieu, 58–59; and bourgeois         London, 177, 180–82; and the
  anxiety, 64; and bourgeois ideal-      Mafia, 53, 57, 59, 291; and
  ism, 81–82; and capitalist poetics,    Norman Mailer, 70–76, 79, 309n.
  198; and casual irony, 127, 191,       6; and melodrama, 175–76, 308n.
  217, 246, 301n. 4; and David           1; as Merlyn in Fools Die, 65–70,
  Chase, 262, 288, 290; and comic        73–76; and money, 56, 69–70, 292;
  sensibility, 163; and copying The      and moral agency, 97, 155–60;
                                   Index                                 341



  and moral dilemmas, 105; and          Ragtime (Doctorow), 6; and fathers,
  mother, 131, 203–05, 278–79; and        213–16, 220; as fictional twin of
  mythical signification, 155–59;         The Godfather, 16; and The Godfa-
  and naturalizing, 100, 152–54,          ther, 209–27; and history, 211–12,
  159–62; and nature of the uni-          215, 219–21, 224–25, 238; and im-
  verse, 98; as Neapolitan, 111, 129–     age culture, 210, 212, 219; and
  30; and novelistic capital, 65; and     immigration, 209–11, 213–16; and
  Omerta (Puzo), 246–47, 311n. 7,         irony, 212; and metamorphosis,
  311n. 8; and personal mythos, 83;       213–14, 217; and “Our Gang,” 210,
  and politicized speech, 100; and        218–22; and postmodernism, 212,
  popular fiction criticism, 29; and      216, 221; and replication, 215, 219;
  popular success, 15, 81; and pot-       women’s roles in, 217–18, 221
  boilers, 81; premature affirmation    Rand, Ayn, 13, 125, 177, 182, 198;
  by, 43; and Ragtime, 209–27; and        Atlas Shrugged, 13, 182; The Foun-
  readership, 60; and repetition of       tainhead, 13, 182
  signifieds, 192–93; and resent-       Remains of the Day, The, 275, 287
  ment, 69, 81; and screenwriting       Rice, Anne, 52; and vampire fami-
  credits, 7, 310n. 6; and Jules          lies, 11
  Segal, 64; and self-pity, 56, 66;     Riesman, David, 242; The Lonely
  and The Sicilian, 244–45; and           Crowd, 242
  Sicilians, 111, 129–30, 132; and      Riis, Jacob, 10
  Sicilian dialect, 301–02n. 1; and     Robbins, Harold, 72, 182, 198, 292,
  Superman, 143, 305n. 21, 305n. 22;      308n 1; The Carpetbaggers, 182
  and taste culture, 30, 33; and        Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 190, 194
  writer’s crisis, 73; and writing,     Roosevelt, Theodore, 183
  68–70, 81–83; and writing below       Rorty, Richard, 38; and Hume, 40;
  gifts, 31, 57; and writing The          Truth and Progress, 40
  Godfather, 32, 64, 81–83; and Nino    Roth, Philip, 11, 182, 283; Goodbye,
  Valenti, 61–64, 79–83; and              Columbus, 182, 283; Portnoy’s
  women’s roles, 129–38, 162–68,          Complaint, 11
  308n. 15, 313n. 16; and World         Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 24, 37
  War II, 55
Pynchon, Thomas, 104; The Crying
  of Lot 49, 104                        Sabatini, Rafael, 55
                                        St. Elsewhere, 286
                                        Samuels, Shirley, 310n. 2; Romances
Rabinowitz, Peter, 34–36, 104, 301n.      of the Republic, 310n. 2
  2; and configuration, 103–04; and     Sartre, Jean Paul, 43; What is Litera-
  rules of coherence, 35; and signi-      ture, 43
  fication, 103–04; Before Reading,     Scorsese, Martin, 248, 311n. 9, 312n.
  34–36, 103–04, 106                      5; Casino, 248; Goodfellas, 248,
Raft, George, 249                         312n. 5; Mean Streets, 248
 342                  The Godfather and American Culture



Sea of Love, 249                          Sinicropi, Giovanni, 302n. 11
Segal, Jules (The Godfather), 63–64,      Smith, Adam, 201
  107, 113, 205; and Johnny               Smith, Barbara Herrnstein, 19, 26,
  Fontane, 64; and going bad, 140–          33, 307n. 12; Contingencies of
  41; and hack work, 64; as Puzo’s          Value, 19, 26, 33, 307n. 12
  double, 64; and talent, 64              Sollors, Werner, 108
Sentiment, 20, 288; and aesthetic         Sopranos, The (television), 6–7, 11, 16,
  judgment, 24; as arbiter of judg-         231, 233, 242, 248–50, 253–90,
  ment, 20; and contemporary criti-         311n. 7, 314n. 28; and audience
  cism, 48; and Corleone logic,             reception, 292–93; and cinema,
  200–07; and framing of The Godfa-         256–62, 285; and copies, 315n. 34;
  ther, 204; in Hume 20–21, 23; and         and the economy, 282, 289–90,
  individual response, 23; in mod-          314n. 27, 314n. 31; and ethnic
  ernism, 21; as moral guide, 20;           identity, 268–69; and family, 261–
  and the Sentimental Novel, 202;           62, 269, 278, 281–90; and Godfather
  and sentimentality, 24, 216               trivia, 256–57; and HBO, 282–88;
Serpico, 249                                and identity politics, 293–95, 316n.
Shakespeare, William, 152; Julius           4; and immigrants, 265–68; and
  Caesar, 152                               Italian Americans, 265–69; and
Sheldon, Sidney, 243                        literary references, 314–15n. 33;
Sicilian, The (Puzo), 80, 231, 238,         and male melodrama, 254; and
  244–45                                    men’s roles, 263–77; and mother-
Sicily, 9, 45, 69, 141, 166–67, 185,        hood, 277–81; and murder, 267,
  213–14, 247; and destiny, 197, 199;       269, 272–73; and popular narra-
  and elite literature, 122–23; and         tive, 265; and postmodernism,
  the Enlightenment, 37; and                257–61, 273; and psychoanalysis
  ethnicity, 122–25; in Godfather III,      as recovery narrative, 270–73, 280–
  289–90; history of, 111–13; and           81; The Public Enemy in, 311n. 10;
  immigration, 110–13, 199; and             and Pulp Fiction, 249–50; and reli-
  melodrama, 189; and modernism,            gion, 273–77; and residual forma-
  122–25; and narrative, 122–25;            tions, 296; and television, 254,
  and reverse immigration, 240; in          262–64, 273, 282–86; and therapy,
  The Sicilian, 244–45                      262–73, 276–77, 280; women’s
Silence, 11; and elite literature, 127;     roles in, 253–55, 262–63, 268–69,
  and ethnic performance, 127; and          276–81, 286, 289–90, 295
  Italian American males, 11; in The      Soprano, Anthony, Jr. (The Sopra-
  Godfather, 121–27; and omerta,            nos), 266, 275–76, 279, 285, 289
  121–25; and male silence, 124           Soprano, Carmela (The Sopranos),
Simpsons, The, 284, 314n. 28                253, 256, 268–69, 280–81, 286,
Sinatra, Frank, 56, 76, 259; and            289–90; and religion, 273–77
  From Here to Eternity, 77–79 and        Soprano, Janice (The Sopranos), 280–
  Some Came Running, 77–79                  81, 290
                                    Index                                343



Soprano, Johnny Boy (The Sopra-          Talese, Gay, 249, 311n. 2; Honor Thy
  nos), 277–79, 284, 290                   Father, 249, 311n. 2, 313n. 12
Soprano, Junior (The Sopranos), 282,     Tamburri, Anthony Julian, 303n. 1;
  290, 314n. 26, 315n. 35                  A Semiotic of Ethnicity, 303n. 1
Soprano, Livia (The Sopranos), 277–      Tan, Amy, 131
  81, 289–90, 311n. 8, 313n. 21,         Tarentino, Quentin, 249–50; Pulp
  314n. 23, 314n. 24                       Fiction, 249–50
Soprano, Meadow (The Sopranos),          thirtysomething, 286
  246, 273, 275–77, 280, 289, 314n. 30   Tompkins, Jane, 299n. 3, 306n. 2;
Soprano, Tony (The Sopranos), 37,          West of Everything, 299–300n. 3,
  233–34, 246–47, 249–51, 253–58,          306n. 2
  260–90, 296, 299n. 2, 314n. 27;        Torgovnick, Marianna DeMarco,
  and college tour, 10; and epic           141, 296, 304n. 10, 316n. 5
  heroism, 271; and Hawthorne, 10;       Touched by an Angel, 273
  and home, 283–88; and identity         Travolta, John, 250
  politics, 267–69, 293–94; and          Trilling, Lionel, 5, 186
  immigrants, 265–68; and Italian
  American identity, 267–69; and
  Livia Soprano, 277–81; and male        Updike, John, 182, Rabbit, Run, 182
  hysteria, 281; and maternal            Uris, Leon, 310n. 4; Exodus, 310n. 4
  imaginary, 281, 314n. 24; and
  moral decisions, 10; and Omerta
  (Puzo), 311n. 7; and poor              Valenti, Nino (The Godfather), 60–64;
  parenting, 266, 268; and televi-         as artist, 62–63; as Dean Martin,
  sion fathers, 254, 283–84; and           60, 77–79; and death, 80–83; and
  therapy, 253, 262–73, 280–81, 290        despair, 80–83; excluded from
Southey, Robert, 310n. 1                   Godfather I, 63, 80; in Hollywood,
Spencer, Herbert, 176–77, 207              163; as Italian singer, 81; and
Stalin, Joseph, 194                        Omerta (Puzo), 311n. 7; as movie
Steinbeck, John, 71, 78, 131, 303n. 8;     star, 77; as Puzo’s double, 61–63;
  The Grapes of Wrath, 131, 303n. 8        and sexual equipment, 163; and
Stone, Irving, 198                         Some Came Running, 77–79
Stone, Lawrence, 198                     Vaughan, Vince, 296
Stone, Oliver, 259                       Vidal, Gore, 71
Stone, Sharon, 248                       Virginian, The, 254
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 133, 175,        Viscusi, Robert, 141
  186, 200, 203, 237, 293, 306n. 4;
  Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 40, 175, 186,
  241, 293, 306n. 4                      Walcott,   Derek, 232; Omeros, 232
Superman, 143, 305n. 21, 305n. 22        Wallace,   Irving, 308n. 1
Susann, Jacqueline, 308n. 1              Wallace,   Lew, 198
Swingers, 259, 312n. 6                   Waltons,   The, 284, 314n. 29
 344                The Godfather and American Culture



Washington, George, 191                  and Americanization, 158; as
Wellman, William, 248; The Public        anti-communist, 155, 192; and
 Enemy, 248, 311n. 10                    bella figura, 116–17; as child se-
West, Nathanael, 163                     ducer, 31; as Don Corleone’s
White, Mimi, 285, 313n. 17               double, 155–58, 164; and devi-
Whyte, William H., 242; The Organi-      ance, 159–60; and Khartoum
 zation Man, 242–43                      (horse), 154–55, 158–59, 162–64,
Wilder, Billy, 249; Some Like It Hot,    167–68, 307n. 14; as moralizer,
 249                                     155–56; as sexual abuser, 157–59,
Williams, Raymond, 34                    162–68
Williams, William Carlos, 113, 139,     Women’s roles: in The Fortunate
 304n. 16; “To Elsie,” 139, 304n. 16     Pilgrim, 128–37; in The Godfather,
Williamson, Marianne, 270                40, 99–102, 162–68, 200–07, 295;
Wilson, Sloan, 183; The Man in the       in Ragtime, 217–18, 221; and sig-
 Grey Flannel Suit, 183, 243, 308n.      nification, 162–68; in The Sopra-
 3                                       nos, 253–55, 262–63, 268–69,
Winfrey, Oprah, 270                      276–81, 286, 289–90, 295
Wister, Owen, 198; The Virginian,       World War II, 14, 190; and Ameri-
 198                                     can writers, 5; and Micheal
Wolfe, Thomas, 71, 78                    Corleone’s escape and heroism,
Wolfe, Tom, 316n. 1; The Bonfire of      33, 53, 103, 238; and the Great
 the Vanities, 316n. 1; A Man in         American Novel, 70–71; and
 Full, 316n. 1                           Puzo, 55; and writers coming
Wolff, Naomi, 270                        home, 52, 72
Woltz, Jack (The Godfather), 1, 60,
 74, 79, 113–14, 151, 153–60, 162–
 68, 170, 188–89, 199, 226, 306n. 7;    X-Files, The, 273
